CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
The Glories of Lord Ananta

In this chapter, Shukadeva Gosvami describes Ananta, the source of Lord Shiva. Lord Ananta, whose body is completely spiritual, resides at the root of the planet Patala. He always lives in the core of Lord Shiva's heart, and He helps him destroy the universe. Ananta instructs Lord Shiva how to destroy the cosmos, and thus He is sometimes called tamasi, or “one who is in the mode of darkness.” He is the original Deity of material consciousness, and because He attracts all living entities, He is sometimes known as Sankarshana. The entire material world is situated on the hoods of Lord Sankarshana. From His forehead He transmits to Lord Shiva the power to destroy this material world. Because Lord Sankarshana is an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, many devotees offer Him prayers, and in the planetary system of Patala, all the suras, asuras, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas and learned sages offer Him their respectful obeisances. The Lord talks with them in a sweet voice. His bodily construction is completely spiritual and very, very beautiful. Anyone who hears about Him from a proper spiritual master becomes free from all material conceptions of life. The entire material energy is working according to the plans of Anantadeva. Therefore we should regard Him as the root cause of the material creation. There is no end to His strength, and no one can fully describe Him, even with countless mouths. Therefore He is called Ananta (unlimited). Being very merciful toward all living entities, He has exhibited His spiritual body. Shukadeva Gosvami describes the glories of Anantadeva to Maharaja Parikshit in this way.

Text 1

Translation
Shri Shukadeva Gosvami said to Maharaja Parikshit: My dear King, approximately 240,000 miles beneath the planet Patala lives another incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the expansion of Lord Vishnu known as Lord Ananta or Lord Sankarshana. He is always in the transcendental position, but because He is worshiped by Lord Shiva, the deity of tamo-guna or darkness, He is sometimes called tamasi. Lord Ananta is the predominating Deity of the material mode of ignorance as well as the false ego of all conditioned souls. When a conditioned living being thinks, “I am the enjoyer, and this world is meant to be enjoyed by me,” this conception of life is dictated to him by Sankarshana. Thus the mundane conditioned soul thinks himself the Supreme Lord.

Purport
There is a class of men akin to Mayavadi philosophers who misinterpret the aham brahmasmi and so 'ham Vedic mantras to mean, “I am the Supreme Brahman” and “I am identical with the Lord.” This kind of false conception, in which one thinks himself the supreme enjoyer, is a kind of illusion. It is described elsewhere in Shrimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.8): janasya moho 'yam aham mameti. As explained in the above verse, Lord Sankarshana is the predominating Deity of this false conception. Krishna confirms this in Bhagavad-gita (15.15):

sarvasya caham hrdi sannivishto
mattah smrtir jnanam apohanam ca

“I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness.” The Lord is situated in everyone's heart as Sankarshana, and when a demon thinks himself one with the Supreme Lord, the Lord keeps him in that darkness. Although such a demoniac living entity is only an insignificant part of the Supreme Lord, he forgets his true position and thinks he is the Supreme Lord. Because this forgetfulness is created by Sankarshana, He is sometimes called tamasi. The name tamasi does not indicate that He has a material body. He is always transcendental, but because He is the Supersoul of Lord Shiva, who must perform tamasic activities, Sankarshana is sometimes called tamasi.

Text 2

Translation
Shukadeva Gosvami continued: This great universe, situated on one of Lord Anantadeva's thousands of hoods, appears just like a white mustard seed. It is infinitesimal compared to the hood of Lord Ananta.

Text 3

Translation
At the time of devastation, when Lord Anantadeva desires to destroy the entire creation, He becomes slightly angry. Then from between His two eyebrows appears three-eyed Rudra, carrying a trident. This Rudra, who is known as Sankarshana, is the embodiment of the eleven Rudras, or incarnations of Lord Shiva. He appears in order to devastate the entire creation.

Purport
In each creation, the living entities are given a chance to close their business as conditioned souls. When they misuse this opportunity and do not go back home, back to Godhead, Lord Sankarshana becomes angry. The eleven Rudras, expansions of Lord Shiva, come out of Lord Sankarshana's eyebrows due to His angry mood, and all of them together devastate the entire creation.

Text 4

Translation
The pink, transparent toenails on the Lord's lotus feet are exactly like valuable gems polished to a mirror finish. When the unalloyed devotees and the leaders of the snakes offer their obeisances to Lord Sankarshana with great devotion, they become very joyful upon seeing their own beautiful faces reflected in His toenails. Their cheeks are decorated with glittering earrings, and the beauty of their faces is extremely pleasing to see.

Text 5

Translation
Lord Ananta's arms are attractively long, beautifully decorated with bangles and completely spiritual. They are white, and so they appear like silver columns. When the beautiful princesses of the serpent kings, hoping for the Lord's auspicious blessing, smear His arms with aguru pulp, sandalwood pulp and kunkuma, the touch of His limbs awakens lusty desires within them. Understanding their minds, the Lord looks at the princesses with a merciful smile, and they become bashful, realizing that He knows their desires. Then they smile beautifully and look upon the Lord's lotus face, which is beautified by reddish eyes rolling slightly from intoxication and delighted by love for His devotees.

Purport
When males and females touch each other's bodies, their lusty desires naturally awaken. It appears from this verse that there are similar sensations in spiritual bodies. Both Lord Ananta and the women giving Him pleasure had spiritual bodies. Thus all sensations originally exist in the spiritual body. This is confirmed in the Vedanta-sutra: janmady asya yatah. Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura has commented in this connection that the word adi means adi-rasa, the original lusty feeling, which is born from the Supreme. However, spiritual lust and material lust are as completely different as gold and iron. Only one who is very highly elevated in spiritual realization can understand the lusty feelings exchanged between Radha and Krishna, or between Krishna and the damsels of Vraja. Therefore, unless one is very experienced and advanced in spiritual realization, he is forbidden to discuss the lusty feelings of Krishna and the gopis. However, if one is a sincere and pure devotee, the material lust in his heart is completely vanquished as he discusses the lusty feelings between the gopis and Krishna, and he makes quick progress in spiritual life.

Text 6

Translation
Lord Sankarshana is the ocean of unlimited spiritual qualities, and thus He is known as Anantadeva. He is nondifferent from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For the welfare of all living entities within this material world, He resides in His abode, restraining His anger and intolerance.

Purport
Anantadeva's main mission is to dissolve this material creation, but He checks His anger and intolerance. This material world is created to give the conditioned souls another chance to go back home, back to Godhead, but most of them do not take advantage of this facility. After the creation, they again exercise their old propensity for lording it over the material world. These activities of the conditioned souls anger Anantadeva, and He desires to destroy the entire material world. Yet, because He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is kind toward us and checks His anger and intolerance. Only at certain times does He express His anger and destroy the material world.

Text 7

Translation
Shukadeva Gosvami continued: The demigods, the demons, the Uragas [serpentine demigods], the Siddhas, the Gandharvas, the Vidyadharas and many highly elevated sages constantly offer prayers to the Lord. Because He is intoxicated, the Lord looks bewildered, and His eyes, appearing like flowers in full bloom, move to and fro. He pleases His personal associates, the heads of the demigods, by the sweet vibrations emanating from His mouth. Dressed in bluish garments and wearing a single earring, He holds a plow on His back with His two beautiful and well-constructed hands. Appearing as white as the heavenly King Indra, He wears a golden belt around His waist and a vaijayanti garland of ever-fresh tulasi blossoms around His neck. Bees intoxicated by the honeylike fragrance of the tulasi flowers hum very sweetly around the garland, which thus becomes more and more beautiful. In this way, the Lord enjoys His very magnanimous pastimes.

Text 8

Translation
If persons who are very serious about being liberated from material life hear the glories of Anantadeva from the mouth of a spiritual master in the chain of disciplic succession, and if they always meditate upon Sankarshana, the Lord enters the cores of their hearts, vanquishes all the dirty contamination of the material modes of nature, and cuts to pieces the hard knot within the heart, which has been tied tightly since time immemorial by the desire to dominate material nature through fruitive activities. Narada Muni, the son of Lord Brahma, always glorifies Anantadeva in his father's assembly. There he sings blissful verses of his own composition, accompanied by his stringed instrument [or a celestial singer] known as Tumburu.

Purport
None of these descriptions of Lord Anantadeva are imaginary. They are all transcendentally blissful and full of actual knowledge. However, unless one hears them directly from a bona fide spiritual master in the line of disciplic succession, one cannot understand them. This knowledge is delivered to Narada by Lord Brahma, and the great saint Narada, along with his companion, Tumburu, distributes it all over the universe. Sometimes the Supreme Personality of Godhead is described as UttamaShloka, one who is praised by beautiful poetry. Narada composes various poems to glorify Lord Ananta, and therefore the word samShlokayam asa (praised by selected poetry) is used in this verse.

The Vaishnavas in the Gaudiya-sampradaya belong to the disciplic succession stemming from Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma is the spiritual master of Narada, Narada is the spiritual master of Vyasadeva, and Vyasadeva wrote the Shrimad-Bhagavatam as a commentary on the Vedanta-sutra. Therefore all devotees in the Gaudiyasampradaya accept the activities of Lord Ananta related in the Shrimad-Bhagavatam as authentic, and they are thus benefited by going back home, back to Godhead. The contamination in the heart of a conditioned soul is like a huge accumulation of garbage created by the three modes of material nature, especially the modes of rajas (passion) and tamas (ignorance). This contamination becomes manifest in the form of lusty desires and greed for material possessions. As confirmed herein, unless one receives transcendental knowledge in disciplic succession, there is no question of his becoming purified of this contamination.

Text 9

Translation
By His glance, the Supreme Personality of Godhead enables the modes of material nature to act as the causes of universal creation, maintenance and destruction. The Supreme Soul is unlimited and beginningless, and although He is one, He has manifested Himself in many forms. How can human society understand the ways of the Supreme?

Purport
From Vedic literature we learn that when the Supreme Lord glances (sa aikshata) over the material energy, the three modes of material nature become manifest and create material variety. Before He glances over the material energy, there is no possibility of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the material world. The Lord existed before the creation, and consequently He is eternal and unchanging. Therefore how can any human being, however great a scientist or philosopher he may be, understand the ways of the Supreme Personality of Godhead?

The following quotations from Caitanya-bhagavata (adi-khanda, 1.48-52 and 1.58-69) tell of the glories of Lord Ananta:

ki brahma, ki Shiva, ki sanakadi 'kumara'
vyasa, Shuka, naradadi, 'bhakta' nama yanra

“Lord Brahma, Lord Shiva, the four Kumaras [Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumara], Vyasadeva, Shukadeva Gosvami and Narada are all pure devotees, eternal servants of the Lord.

sabara pujita Shri-ananta-mahaShaya
sahasra-vadana prabhu — bhakti-rasamaya

“Lord Shri Ananta is worshiped by all the uncontaminated devotees mentioned above. He has thousands of hoods and is the reservoir of all devotional service.

adideva, maha-yogi, 'iShvara', 'vaishnava'
mahimara anta inha na janaye saba

“Lord Ananta is the original person and the great mystic controller. At the same time, He is a servant of God, a Vaishnava. Since there is no end to His glories, no one can understand Him fully.

sevana Shunila, ebe Shuna thakurala
atma-tantre yena-mate vaisena patala

“I have already spoken to you of His service to the Lord. Now hear how the self-sufficient Anantadeva exists in the lower planetary system of Patala.

Shri-narada-gosani 'tumburu' kari' sange
se yaSha gayena brahma-sthane Shloka-vandhe

“Bearing his stringed instrument, the tumburu, on his shoulders, the great sage Narada Muni always glorifies Lord Ananta. Narada Muni has composed many transcendental verses in praise of the Lord.

srshti, sthiti, pralaya, sattvadi yata guna
yanra drshti-pate haya, yaya punah punah

“Simply due to the glance of Lord Ananta, the three material modes of nature interact and produce creation, maintenance and annihilation. These modes of nature appear again and again.

advitiya-rupa, satya anadi mahattva
tathapi 'ananta' haya, ke bujhe se tattva?

“The Lord is glorified as one without a second and as the supreme truth who has no beginning. Therefore He is called Anantadeva [unlimited]. Who can understand Him?

Shuddha-sattva-murti prabhu dharena karunaya
ye-vigrahe sabara prakaSha sulilaya

“His form is completely spiritual, and He manifests it only by His mercy. All the activities in this material world are conducted only in His form.

yanhara taranga Shikhi' simha mahavali
nija-jana-mano ranje hana kutuhali

“He is very powerful and always prepared to please His personal associates and devotees.

ye ananta-namera Shravana-sankirtane
ye-te mate kene nahi bole ye-te jane
aShesha-janmera bandha chinde sei-kshane
ataeva vaishnava na chade kabhu tane

“If we simply try to engage in the congregational chanting of the glories of Lord Anantadeva, the dirty things in our hearts, accumulated during many births, will immediately be washed away. Therefore a Vaishnava never loses an opportunity to glorify Anantadeva.

'Shesha' ba-i samsarera gati nahi ara
anantera name sarva-jivera uddhara

“Lord Anantadeva is known as Shesha [the unlimited end] because He ends our passage through this material world. Simply by chanting His glories, everyone can be liberated.

ananta prthivi-giri samudra-sahite
ye-prabhu dharena gire palana karite

“On His head, Anantadeva sustains the entire universe, with its millions of planets containing enormous oceans and mountains.

sahasra phanara eka-phane 'bindu' yena
ananta vikrama, na janena, 'ache' hena

“He is so large and powerful that this universe rests on one of His hoods just like a drop of water. He does not know where it is.

sahasra-vadane Krishna-yaSha nirantara
gaite achena adi-deva mahi-dhara

“While bearing the universe on one of His hoods, Anantadeva chants the glories of Krishna with each of His thousands of mouths.

gayena ananta, Shri-yaShera nahi anta
jaya-bhanga nahi karu, donhe — balavanta

“Although He has been chanting the glories of Lord Krishna since time immemorial, He has still not come to their end.

adyapiha 'Shesha'-deva sahasra-Shri-mukhe
gayena caitanya-yaSha anta nahi dekhe

“To this very day, Lord Ananta continues to chant the glories of Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and still He finds no end to them.”

Text 10

Translation
This manifestation of subtle and gross matter exists within the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Out of causeless mercy toward His devotees, He exhibits various forms, which are all transcendental. The Supreme Lord is most liberal, and He possesses all mystic power. To conquer the minds of His devotees and give pleasure to their hearts, He appears in different incarnations and manifests many pastimes.

Purport
Shrila Jiva Gosvami has translated this verse as follows. “The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of all causes. It is by His will that gross and subtle ingredients interact. He appears in various incarnations just to please the hearts of His pure devotees.” For example, the Supreme Lord appeared in the transcendental incarnation of Lord Varaha (the boar) just to please His devotees by lifting the planet earth from the Garbhodaka Ocean.

Text 11

Translation
Even if he be distressed or degraded, any person who chants the holy name of the Lord, having heard it from a bona fide spiritual master, is immediately purified. Even if he chants the Lord's name jokingly or by chance, he and anyone who hears him are freed from all sins. Therefore how can anyone seeking disentanglement from the material clutches avoid chanting the name of Lord Shesha? Of whom else should one take shelter?

Text 12

Translation
Because the Lord is unlimited, no one can estimate His power. This entire universe, filled with its many great mountains, rivers, oceans, trees and living entities, is resting just like an atom on one of His many thousands of hoods. Is there anyone, even with thousands of tongues, who can describe His glories?

Text 13

Translation
There is no end to the great and glorious qualities of that powerful Lord Anantadeva. Indeed, His prowess is unlimited. Though self-sufficient, He Himself is the support of everything. He resides beneath the lower planetary systems and easily sustains the entire universe.

Text 14

Translation
My dear King, as I heard of it from my spiritual master, I have fully described to you the creation of this material world according to the fruitive activities and desires of the conditioned souls. Those conditioned souls, who are full of material desires, achieve various situations in different planetary systems, and in this way they live within this material creation.

Purport
In this regard, Shrila Bhaktivinoda thakura sings,

anadi karama-phale, padi' bhavarnava-jale,
taribare na dekhi upaya

“My Lord, I do not know when I commenced my material life, but I can certainly experience that I have fallen in the deep ocean of nescience. Now I can also see that there is no other way to get out of it than to take shelter of Your lotus feet.” Similarly, Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu offers the following prayer:

ayi nanda-tanuja kinkaram
patitam mam vishame bhavambudhau
krpaya tava pada-pankaja-
sthita-dhuli-sadrSham vicintaya

“My dear Lord, son of Nanda Maharaja, I am Your eternal servant. Somehow or other, I have fallen into this ocean of nescience. Kindly, therefore, save me from this horrible condition of materialistic life.”

Text 15

Translation
My dear King, I have thus described how people generally act according to their different desires and, as a result, get different types of bodies in higher or lower planets. You inquired of these things from me, and I have explained to you whatever I have heard from authorities. What shall I speak of now?

Purport
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-fifth Chapter, of the Shrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Glories of Lord Ananta.”