CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX
The Slaying of Ariṣṭā, the Bull Demon

This chapter describes how Kṛṣṇa killed Ariṣṭāsura and how Kaṁsa reacted when he learned from Nārada that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were the sons of Vasudeva.

The demon Ariṣṭa wanted to kill Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, and thus he assumed the form of a huge bull with sharp horns. Everyone in Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd village became terrified when Ariṣṭāsura approached it, but the Lord pacified them, and when the bull demon charged Him He seized him by the horns and threw him about six yards. Though weakened, Ariṣṭa still wanted to attack Kṛṣṇa. Thus, dripping with sweat, he charged the Lord once again. This time Kṛṣṇa grabbed his horns, threw him to the ground and thrashed him like a pile of wet clothing. The demon vomited blood and gave up his life. Then Kṛṣṇa and Rāma, while being honored by the demigods and cowherd boys, returned to the village.

A short time later Nārada Muni, the great sage among the demigods, came to see King Kaṁsa. He informed the King that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were not Nanda’s sons but rather Vasudeva’s. It was out of fear of Kaṁsa that Vasudeva had put the two boys under Nanda’s care. Furthermore, said Nārada, Kaṁsa would meet his death at Their hands.

Kaṁsa shook with fear and anger when he heard all this, and in great agitation he began thinking of how to destroy Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. He called for the demons Cāṇūra and Muṣṭika and instructed them to kill the two brothers in a wrestling match. Then he spoke to Akrūra, who was expert at executing his duties. Taking Akrūra by the hand, Kaṁsa persuaded him to go to Vraja to bring the two boys to Mathurā. Akrūra agreed to carry out Kaṁsa’s order and then returned home.

Text 1

Translation
Śukadeva Goswāmī said: The demon Ariṣṭa then came to the cowherd village. Appearing in the form of a bull with a large hump, he made the earth tremble as he tore it apart with his hooves.

Purport
According to the Śrī Viṣṇu Purāṇa, Ariṣṭāsura entered Kṛṣṇa’s village at twilight, as the Lord prepared to dance with the gopīs:

prodoṣārdhe kadācit tu
rāsāsakte janārdane
trāsayan sa-mado goṣṭham
ariṣṭaḥ sampāgataḥ

“Once, midway through the period of dusk, when Lord Janārdana was eager to perform the rāsa dance, Ariṣṭāsura madly entered the cowherd village, terrifying everyone.”

Text 2

Translation
Ariṣṭāsura bellowed very harshly and pawed the ground. With his tail raised and his eyes glaring, he began to tear up the embankments with the tips of his horns, every now and then passing a little stool and urine.

Texts 3-4

Translation
My dear King, clouds hovered about sharp-horned Ariṣṭāsura’s hump, mistaking it for a mountain, and when the cowherd men and ladies caught sight of the demon, they were struck with terror. Indeed, the strident reverberation of his roar so frightened the pregnant cows and women that they lost their fetuses in miscarriages.

Purport
The Vedic literature categorizes miscarriages as follows: Ā-caturthād bhavet srāvaḥ pātaḥ pañcama-ṣaṣṭhayoḥ/ ata ūrdhvaṁ prasūtiḥ syāt. “Up to the fourth month a premature delivery is called srāva, in the fifth and sixth months it is called pāta, and after this it is considered a birth (prasūti).”

Text 5

Translation
The domestic animals fled the pasture in fear, O King, and all the inhabitants rushed to Lord Govinda for shelter, crying, “Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa!”

Text 6

Translation
When the Supreme Lord saw the cowherd community distraught and fleeing in fear, He calmed them, saying, “Don’t be afraid.” Then He called out to the bull demon as follows.

Text 7

Translation
You fool! What do you think you’re doing, you wicked rascal, frightening the cowherd community and their animals when I am here just to punish corrupt miscreants like you!

Text 8

Translation
Having spoken these words, the infallible Lord Hari slapped His arms with His palms, further angering Ariṣṭa with the loud sound. The Lord then casually threw His mighty, serpentine arm over the shoulder of a friend and stood facing the demon.

Purport
Lord Kṛṣṇa showed His contempt for the ignorant demon.

Text 9

Translation
Thus provoked, Ariṣṭa pawed the ground with one of his hooves and then, with the clouds hovering around his upraised tail, furiously charged Kṛṣṇa.

Text 10

Translation
Pointing the tips of his horns straight ahead and glaring menacingly at Lord Kṛṣṇa from the corners of his bloodshot eyes, Ariṣṭa rushed toward Him at full speed, like a thunderbolt hurled by Indra.

Text 11

Translation
The Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa seized Ariṣṭāsura by the horns and threw him back eighteen steps, just as an elephant might do when fighting a rival elephant.

Text 12

Translation
Thus repulsed by the Supreme Lord, the bull demon got up and, breathing hard and sweating all over his body, again charged Him in a mindless rage.

Text 13

Translation
As Ariṣṭa attacked, Lord Kṛṣṇa seized him by the horns and knocked him to the ground with His foot. The Lord then thrashed him as if he were a wet cloth, and finally He yanked out one of the demon’s horns and struck him with it until he lay prostrate.

Text 14

Translation
Vomiting blood and profusely excreting stool and urine, kicking his legs and rolling his eyes about, Ariṣṭāsura thus went painfully to the abode of Death. The demigods honored Lord Kṛṣṇa by scattering flowers upon Him.

Text 15

Translation
Having thus killed the bull demon Ariṣṭa, He who is a festival for the gopīs’ eyes entered the cowherd village with Balarāma.

Purport
This verse exemplifies the sublime contrast of spiritual qualities within Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In one four-line verse we simultaneously learn that Lord Kṛṣṇa killed a powerful and wicked demon and that His boyish beauty gave festive pleasure to His young girlfriends. Lord Kṛṣṇa is as hard as a thunderbolt or as soft as a rose, depending on our attitude toward Him. The demon Ariṣṭa wanted to kill Kṛṣṇa and all His friends, so the Lord beat him into a wet rag and killed him. The gopīs, however, loved Kṛṣṇa, and thus the Lord boyishly reciprocated their conjugal feelings.

Text 16

Translation
After Ariṣṭāsura had been killed by Kṛṣṇa, who acts wonderfully, Nārada Muni went to speak to King Kaṁsa. That powerful sage of godly vision addressed the King as follows.

Purport
The term deva-darśana can be understood in many ways, all of which are consistent with the context and purport of this narration. Deva means “God,” and darśanaḥ means “seeing” or “an audience with a great personality.” Thus deva-darśana, a name for Nārada Muni, indicates that Nārada has attained the perfection of seeing God, that getting Nārada’s audience is as good as getting God’s (since Nārada is a pure representative of the Lord), and also that Nārada’s audience is as good as that of the demigods, who are also known as devas. That there are all these meanings of the term deva-darśanaḥ reveals something of the richness of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam’s language.

From the Purāṇas, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has quoted twenty verses describing a joking conversation between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that took place after Kṛṣṇa had killed the demon Ariṣṭa. This conversation, so kindly quoted by the ācārya, describes the origin of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, Rādhā’s and Kṛṣṇa’s bathing ponds. The verses are as follows:

māsmān spṛśādya vṛṣabhārdana hanta mugdhā
ghoro ’suro ’yam ayi kṛṣṇa tad apy ayaṁ gauḥ
vṛtro yathā dvija ihāsty ayi niṣkṛtiḥ kiṁ
śudhyed bhavāṁs tri-bhuvana-sthita-tīrtha-kṛcchrāt

“The innocent young gopīs said, ‘Ah, Kṛṣṇa, don’t touch us now, O killer of a bull! Alas, even though Ariṣṭa was a terrible demon, still he was a male cow, so You will have to undergo atonement, just as Lord Indra did after killing Vṛtrāsura. But how can You purify Yourself without going to the trouble of visiting every single holy place in the three worlds?’”

kiṁ paryaṭāmi bhuvanāny adhunaiva sarvā
ānīya tīrtha-vitatīḥ karavāṇi tāsu
snānaṁ vilokayata tāvad idaṁ mukundaḥ
procyaiva tatra kṛtavān bata pārṣṇi-ghātam

“[Kṛṣṇa replied,] ‘Why should I have to wander throughout the entire universe? I will at once bring all the countless pilgrimage places here and take My bath in them. Just watch!’ With this, Lord Mukunda struck His heel on the ground.”

pātālato jalam idaṁ kila bhogavatyā
āyātam atra nikhilā api tīrtha-saṅghāḥ
āgacchateti bhagavad-vacasā ta etya
tatraiva rejur atha kṛṣṇa uvāca gopīḥ

“[Then He said,] ‘This is the water of the Bhogavatī River, coming from the Pātāla region. And now, O holy places, all of you please come here!’ When the Supreme Lord had spoken these words, all the holy places went there and appeared before Him. Kṛṣṇa then addressed the gopīs as follows.”

tīrthāni paśyata harer vacasā tavaivaṁ
naiva pratīma iti tā atha tīrtha-varyāḥ
procuḥ kṛtāñjali-puṭā lavaṇābdhir asmi
kṣīrābdhir asmi śṛṇutāmara-dīrghikāsmi

“‘See all the holy places!’

“But the gopīs replied, ‘We don’t see them as You describe.’

“Then those best of holy places, joining their palms in supplication, spoke up:

“‘I am the salt ocean.’

“‘I am the Ocean of Milk.’

“‘I am the Amara-dīrghikā.’”

śoṇo ’pi sindhur aham asmi bhavāmi tāmra-
parṇī ca puṣkaram ahaṁ ca sarasvatī ca
godāvarī ravi-sutā sarayuḥ prayāgo
revāsmi paśyata jalaṁ kuruta pratītim

“‘I am the river Śoṇa.’

“‘I am the Sindhu.’

“‘I am the Tāmraparṇī.’

“‘I am the holy place Puṣkara.’

“‘I am the river Sarasvatī.’

“‘And we are the Godāvarī, Yamunā and Revā rivers and the confluence of rivers at Prayāga. Just see our waters!’”

snātvā tato harir ati-prajagalbha eva
śuddhaḥ saro ’py akaravaṁ sthita-sarva-tīrtham
yuṣmābhir ātma-januṣīha kṛto na dharmaḥ
ko ’pi kṣitāv atha sakhīr nijagāda rādhā

“After purifying Himself by bathing, Lord Hari became quite arrogant and said, ‘I have produced a pond containing all the various holy places, whereas you gopīs must never have executed any religious duties on this earth for the pleasure of Lord Brahmā.’ Then Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī addressed Her girlfriends as follows.”

kāryaṁ mayāpy ati-manohara-kuṇḍam ekaṁ
tasmād yatadhvam iti tad-vacanena tābhiḥ
śrī-kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍa-taṭa-paścima-diśya-mando
gartaḥ kṛto vṛṣabha-daitya-khurair vyaloki

“‘I must create an even more beautiful pond. So go to work!’ Having heard these words, the gopīs saw that Ariṣṭāsura’s hooves had dug a shallow ditch just west of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pond.”

tatrārdra-mṛn-mṛdula-gola-tatīḥ prati-sva-
hastoddhṛtā anati-dūra-gatā vidhāya
divyaṁ saraḥ prakaṭitaṁ ghaṭikā-dvayena
tābhir vilokya sarasaṁ smarate sma kṛṣṇaḥ

“At that nearby spot, all the gopīs began digging up lumps of soft mud with their hands, and in this way a divine pond manifested in the short span of an hour. Kṛṣṇa was astonished to see the lake they produced.”

proce ca tīrtha-salilaiḥ paripūrayaitan
mat-kuṇḍataḥ sarasijākṣi sahālibhis tvam
rādhā tadā na na na neti jagāda yasmāt
tvat-kuṇḍa-nīram uru-go-vadha-pātakāktam

“He said, ‘Go ahead, lotus-eyed one. You and Your companions should fill this pond with water from Mine.’

“But Rādhā replied, ‘No, no, no, no! This is impossible, since the water of Your pond is contaminated by Your terrible sin of killing a cow.’”

āhṛtya puṇya-salilaṁ śata-koṭi-kumbhaiḥ
sakhy-arbudena saha mānasa-jāhnavītaḥ
etat saraḥ sva-madhunā paripūrayāmi
tenaiva kīrtim atulāṁ tanavāni loke

“‘I will have My countless gopī companions bring the pure water of the Mānasa-gaṅgā here in billions of pots. In this way I will fill this lake with My own water and thus make its renown unequaled in the entire world.’”

kṛṣṇeṅgitena sahasaitya samasta-tīrtha-
sakhyas tadīya-saraso dhṛta-divya-mūrtiḥ
tuṣṭāva tatra vṛṣabhānu-sutāṁ praṇamya
bhaktyā kṛtāñjali-puṭaḥ sravad-asra-dhāraḥ

“Lord Kṛṣṇa then gestured to a heavenly personality who was an intimate associate of all the holy places. Suddenly that person rose up out of Kṛṣṇa’s pond and bowed down to the daughter of Śrī Vṛṣabhānu [Rādhārāṇī]. Then, with palms joined and tears pouring from his eyes, he began praying to Her in devotion.”

devi tvadīya-mahimānam avaiti sarva
śāstrārtha-vin na ca vidhir na haro na lakṣmīḥ
kintv eka eva puruṣārtha-śiromaṇis tvat-
prasveda-mārjana-paraḥ svayam eva kṛṣṇaḥ

“‘O goddess, even Lord Brahmā himself, the knower of all scriptures, cannot understand Your glories, nor can Lord Śiva or Lakṣmī. Only Kṛṣṇa, the supreme goal of all human endeavor, can understand them, and thus He feels obliged to personally make sure that You can wash away Your perspiration when You are fatigued.’”

yaś cāru-yāvaka-rasena bhavat-padābjam
ārajya nūpuram aho nidadhāti nityam
prāpya tvadīya-nayanābja-taṭa-prasādaṁ
svaṁ manyate parama-dhanyatamaṁ prahṛṣyan

tasyājñayaiva sahasā vayam ājagāma
tat-pārṣṇi-ghāṭa-kṛta-kuṇḍa-vare vasāmaḥ
tvaṁ cet prasīdasi karoṣi kṛpā-kaṭākṣaṁ
tarhy eva tarṣa-viṭapī phalito bhaven naḥ

“‘He is always anointing Your lotus feet with nectarean cāru and yāvaka and decorating them with ankle bells, and He rejoices and feels most fortunate simply by satisfying the tips of the toes of Your lotus feet. On His order we have immediately come here to live in this most excellent pond, which He created by one stroke of His heel. But only if You now feel satisfied with us and bestow upon us Your merciful glance will the tree of our desire bear fruit.’”

śrutvā stutiṁ nikhila-tīrtha-gaṇasya tuṣṭā
prāha sma tarṣam ayi vedayateti rādhā
yāma tvadīya-sarasīṁ sa-phalā bhavāma
ity eva no vara iti prakaṭaṁ tadocuḥ

“Hearing this prayer spoken by the representative of the full assembly of holy places, Śrī Rādhā was pleased and said, ‘So, kindly tell Me your desire.’

“They then told Her plainly, ‘Our lives would be successful if we could come to Your pond. That is the benediction we desire.’”

āgacchateti vṛṣabhānu-sutā smitāsyā
provāca kānta-vadanābja-dhṛtākṣi-koṇā
sakhyo ’pi tatra kṛta-sammatayaḥ sukhābdhau
magnā virejur akhilā sthira-jaṅgamāś ca

“Glancing at Her beloved from the corners of Her eyes, the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu replied with a smile, ‘Please come.’ Her gopī companions all agreed with Her decision and became immersed in the ocean of happiness. Indeed, the beauty of all creatures, both mobile and stationary, was enhanced.”

prāpya prasādam atha te vṛṣabhānujāyāḥ
śrī-kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍa-gata-tīrtha-varāḥ prasahya
bhittveva bhittim ati-vegata eva rādhā-
kuṇḍaṁ vyadhuḥ sva-salilaiḥ paripūrṇam eva

“Thus gaining the grace of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the holy rivers and lakes in Śrī Kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍa forcibly broke through its boundary walls and swiftly filled Rādhā-kuṇḍa with their waters.”

proce hariḥ priyatame tava kuṇḍam etan
mat-kuṇḍato ’pi mahimādhikam astu loke
atraiva me salila-kelir ihaiva nityaṁ
snānaṁ yathā tvam asi tadvad idaṁ saro me

“Lord Hari then said, ‘My dear Rādhā, may this pond of Yours become even more world-renowned than Mine. I will always come here to bathe and to enjoy My water pastimes. Indeed, this lake is as dear to Me as You are.’”

rādhābravīd aham api sva-sakhībhir etya
snāsyāmy ariṣṭa-śata-mardanam astu tasya
yo ’riṣṭa-mardana-sarasy uru-bhaktir atra
snāyād vasen mama sa eva mahā-priyo ’stu

“Rādhā replied, ‘I will come to bathe in Your pond as well, even though You may kill hundreds of Ariṣṭa demons here. In the future, anyone who has intense devotion for this lake, which is on the spot where You chastised Ariṣṭāsura, and who bathes or resides here is sure to become very dear to Me.’”

rāsotsavaṁ prakurute sma ca tatra rātrau
kṛṣṇāmbudaḥ kṛta-mahā-rasa-harṣa-varṣaḥ
śrī-rādhikā-pravara-vidyud alaṅkṛta-śrīs
trailokya-madhya-vitatī-kṛta-divya-kīrtiḥ

“That night Lord Kṛṣṇa initiated a rāsa dance at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, generating a torrent of the greatest mood of splendorous pleasure. Śrī Kṛṣṇa resembled a cloud, and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī a brilliant flash of lightning filling the sky with abundant beauty. In this way Their divine glories permeated the expanses of the three worlds.”

As a final note, it should be mentioned that Nārada Muni, being a great sage, understood that the killing of Ariṣṭa more or less concluded the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. Therefore Nārada, anxious to facilitate the transferal of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes to Mathurā, approached Kaṁsa and addressed him as follows.

Text 17

Translation
[Nārada told Kaṁsa:] Yaśodā’s child was actually a daughter, and Kṛṣṇa is the son of Devakī. Also, Rāma is the son of Rohiṇī. Out of fear, Vasudeva entrusted Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma to his friend Nanda Mahārāja, and it is these two boys who have killed your men.

Purport
Kaṁsa had been led to believe that Kṛṣṇa was the son of Yaśodā and that Devakī’s eighth child had been a daughter. The identity of Devakī’s eighth child was extremely important to Kaṁsa because a prophecy had foretold that her eighth child would kill him. Here Nārada informs the King that the eighth child of Devakī was the formidable Kṛṣṇa, thus implying that the prophecy should be taken very seriously. Having received this information, Kaṁsa obviously will now do everything in his power to kill Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma.

Text 18

Translation
Upon hearing this, the master of the Bhojas became furious and lost control of his senses. He picked up a sharp sword to kill Vasudeva.

Text 19

Translation
But Nārada restrained Kaṁsa by reminding him that it was the two sons of Vasudeva who would cause his death. Kaṁsa then had Vasudeva and his wife shackled in iron chains.

Purport
Kaṁsa realized that there was no use in killing Vasudeva, since it was Vasudeva’s sons, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, who were to kill him. According to the ācāryas, Nārada also advised Kaṁsa that if he killed Vasudeva the two young boys might flee and that it was therefore better not to kill him. Rather, Nārada recommended, Kaṁsa should bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma to Kaṁsa’s capital city, Mathurā.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī points out that Nārada did not act inimically toward the great devotees Vasudeva and Devakī when he revealed this information to Kaṁsa. In fact, as explained in the Eleventh Canto, Vasudeva was grateful to Nārada because he was arranging for Kaṁsa’s death at Kṛṣṇa’s hands, and further arranging for Kṛṣṇa to come and live in Mathurā, where His loving father could associate with Him.

Text 20

Translation
After Nārada left, King Kaṁsa summoned Keśī and ordered him, “Go kill Rāma and Kṛṣṇa.”

Purport
Before having Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma brought to Mathurā, Kaṁsa tried sending one more demon to Vṛndāvana.

Text 21

Translation
The King of the Bhojas next called for his ministers, headed by Muṣṭika, Cāṇūra, Śala and Tośala, and also for his elephant-keepers. The King addressed them as follows.

Texts 22-23

Translation
My dear heroic Cāṇūra and Muṣṭika, please hear this. Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, the sons of Ānakadundubhi [Vasudeva], are living in Nanda’s cowherd village. It has been predicted that these two boys will be the cause of my death. When They are brought here, kill Them on the pretext of engaging Them in a wrestling match.

Text 24

Translation
Erect a wrestling ring with many surrounding viewing stands, and bring all the residents of the city and the outlying districts to see the open competition.

Purport
The word mañcāḥ refers to platforms constructed with large pillars. Kaṁsa wanted a festive atmosphere so that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would not be afraid to come.

Text 25

Translation
You, elephant-keeper, my good man, should position the elephant Kuvalayāpīḍa at the entrance to the wrestling arena and have him kill my two enemies.

Text 26

Translation
Commence the bow sacrifice on the Caturdaśī day in accordance with the relevant Vedic injunctions. In ritual slaughter offer the appropriate kinds of animals to the magnanimous Lord Śiva.

Text 27

Translation
Having thus commanded his ministers, Kaṁsa next called for Akrūra, the most eminent of the Yadus. Kaṁsa knew the art of securing personal advantage, and thus he took Akrūra’s hand in his own and spoke to him as follows.

Text 28

Translation
My dear Akrūra, most charitable one, please do me a friendly favor out of respect. Among the Bhojas and Vṛṣṇis, there is no one else as kind to us as you.

Text 29

Translation
Gentle Akrūra, you always carry out your duties soberly, and therefore I am depending on you, just as powerful Indra took shelter of Lord Viṣṇu to achieve his goals.

Text 30

Translation
Please go to Nanda’s village, where the two sons of Ānakadundubhi are living, and without delay bring Them here on this chariot.

Purport
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī gives the following interesting note: “When King Kaṁsa said ‘with this chariot,’ he pointed with his index finger to a brand-new, attractive chariot. Kaṁsa thought that since Akrūra was innocent by nature, when he saw this fine, new vehicle he would naturally want to drive it and quickly bring the two boys back. But the actual reason Akrūra went on a new chariot was that it would have been clearly inappropriate for the Supreme Personality of Godhead to mount a chariot that had already been enjoyed by the wicked Kaṁsa.”

Text 31

Translation
The demigods, who are under the protection of Viṣṇu, have sent these two boys as my death. Bring Them here, and also have Nanda and the other cowherd men come with gifts of tribute.

Text 32

Translation
After you bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, I will have Them killed by my elephant, who is as powerful as death itself. And if by chance They escape from him, I will have Them killed by my wrestlers, who are as strong as lightning.

Text 33

Translation
When these two have been killed, I will kill Vasudeva and all Their lamenting relatives — the Vṛṣṇis, Bhojas and Daśārhas.

Purport
Even today there are wicked political leaders throughout the world who make such plans and even carry them out.

Text 34

Translation
I will also kill my old father, Ugrasena, who is greedy for my kingdom, and I will kill his brother Devaka and all my other enemies as well.

Text 35

Translation
Then, my friend, this earth will be free of thorns.

Text 36

Translation
My elder relative Jarāsandha and my dear friend Dvivida are solid well-wishers of mine, as are Śambara, Naraka and Bāṇa. I will use them all to kill off those kings who are allied with the demigods, and then I will rule the earth.

Text 37

Translation
Now that you understand my intentions, please go at once and bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma to watch the bow sacrifice and see the opulence of the Yadus’ capital.

Text 38

Translation
Śrī Akrūra said: O King, you have expertly devised a process to free yourself of misfortune. Still, one should be equal in success and failure, since it is certainly destiny that produces the results of one’s work.

Text 39

Translation
An ordinary person is determined to act on his desires even when fate prevents their fulfillment. Therefore he encounters both happiness and distress. Yet even though such is the case, I will execute your order.

Purport
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī explains that although what Akrūra said was courteous and encouraging, his hidden meaning was far different. What he really meant was this: “Your plan is not fit to execute, yet I will carry it out since you are the King and I am your subject, and in any case, you are about to die.”

Text 40

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Having thus instructed Akrūra, King Kaṁsa dismissed his ministers and retired to his quarters, and Akrūra returned home.

Purport
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda to the Tenth Canto, Thirty-sixth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled “The Slaying of Ariṣṭā, the Bull Demon.”