CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE
Krishna and the Gopis Meet for the Rasa Dance

This chapter describes how Lord Shri Krishna, intending to enjoy the rasa dance, engaged in arguments and counterarguments with the gopis. Then there is a description of the beginning of the rasa dance and the Lord's pastime of disappearing from the midst of the gopis.

Remembering the promise He had made to the gopis when He had stolen their clothes, Lord Krishna employed His Yoga-maya potency and manifested within Himself the desire to enjoy pastimes during an autumn night. Thus He began to play His flute. When the gopis heard the flute's sound, the impulses of Cupid were violently aroused within them, and they immediately abandoned all their household duties and hastily went to Krishna. All the gopis had purely spiritual bodies, but when some of the gopis' husbands and other family members stopped the young girls from going, Lord Krishna arranged for them to temporarily exhibit material bodies, which they then left at the sides of their husbands. In this way they deceived their relatives and went off to meet Krishna.

When the gopis came before Lord Krishna, He asked, “Why have you come? It is not good for you to travel to such a place in the dead of the night, for this forest is full of violent creatures. Your husbands and children will soon come searching after you to bring you home and engage you again in your household duties. After all, the prime religious duty of a woman is to serve her husband and children. For a respectable woman to consort with a paramour is totally contemptible and sure to obstruct her progress to heaven. Moreover, one develops pure love for Me not by physical proximity but by hearing topics connected with Me, by viewing My Deity form in the temple, by meditating upon Me and by faithfully chanting My glories. Therefore, all of you would do best to return home.”

The gopis were crestfallen to hear this, and after crying a little they replied, with a bit of anger, “It is very unfair for You to reject young girls who have abandoned everything in their lives and come to You with the exclusive desire to serve You. By serving our husbands and children we receive only pain, whereas by serving You, the dearmost Soul of all living beings, we will perfectly fulfill the true religious duty of the self. What woman will not deviate from her prescribed duties as soon as she hears Your flute-song and sees Your form, which enchants the three worlds? Just as the Supreme Lord Vishnu protects the demigods, You destroy the unhappiness of the people of Vrndavana. Therefore You should immediately relieve the torment we have felt because of separation from You.” Wanting to please the gopis, Lord Krishna, who is always satisfied in Himself, responded to their appeals by playing with them in various pastimes. But when this show of attention made them a little proud, He humbled them by suddenly disappearing from the arena of the rasa dance.

Text 1

Translation
Shri Badarayani said: Shri Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, full in all opulences, yet upon seeing those autumn nights scented with blossoming jasmine flowers, He turned His mind toward loving affairs. To fulfill His purposes He employed His internal potency.

Purport
As we begin the famous narration of Lord Krishna's rasa dance, a dance of love with beautiful young girls, questions will inevitably arise in the minds of ordinary people regarding the propriety of God's romantic dancing with many young girls in the middle of a full-moon autumn night. In his description of the Lord's rasa dance in Krishna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Shrila Prabhupada painstakingly explains the spiritual purity of these transcendental activities. Those advanced in the science of Krishna — the great teachers, or acaryas — leave no doubt that Lord Krishna is full and satisfied in Himself, free of all material desire, which is, after all, a sense of incompleteness or lack.

Materialistic persons and impersonal philosophers stubbornly reject the bona fide explanation of Shri Krishna's transcendental nature. There is no reason to deny the beautiful reality of an absolute person able to perform absolute romantic activities, of which our so-called romance is merely a shadow or perverted reflection. The irrational insistence that material activities cannot be a reflection of the perfect, spiritual activities performed by God reflects the unimaginative emotional disposition of those who oppose the reality of Shri Krishna. This psychological disposition of the nondevotees, which leads them to fervently deny the very existence of the absolute person, unfortunately boils down to what may be succinctly described as envy, since the overwhelming majority of the impersonal critics eagerly pursue their own romantic affairs, which they consider quite real and even “spiritual.”

The actual supreme lover is Lord Krishna. The Vedanta-sutra begins by declaring that the Absolute Truth is the source of everything, and even Western philosophy was born in a somewhat awkward attempt at finding the original One behind the apparent many of material existence. Conjugal love, one of the most intense and demanding aspects of human existence, can hardly have nothing at all to do with supreme reality.

In fact, the conjugal love experienced by human beings is a mere reflection of spiritual reality, in which the same love exists in an absolute, pristine state. Thus it is clearly stated here that when Krishna decided to enjoy the romantic atmosphere of autumn, “He resorted to His spiritual potency” (yoga-mayam upaShritah). The spiritual nature of Lord Krishna's conjugal affairs is a major theme in this section of the Shrimad-Bhagavatam.

A woman is attractive because of the sweet sound of her voice, her beauty and gentleness, her enchanting fragrance and tenderness, and also because of her cleverness and skill in music and dance. The most attractive ladies of all are the young gopis of Vrndavana, who are Lord Krishna's internal potency, and this chapter tells how He enjoyed their brilliant feminine qualities — even though, as Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura has mentioned, Lord Krishna was an eight-year-old boy when these events took place.

Ordinary people prefer God simply to be a witness of their romantic affairs. When a boy desires a girl or a girl desires a boy, sometimes they pray to God for their enjoyment. Such people are shocked and dismayed to find out that the Lord can enjoy His own loving affairs with His own transcendental senses. In truth, Shri Krishna is the original Cupid, and His exciting conjugal pastimes will be described in this section of the Bhagavatam.

When Lord Krishna descends to the earth, His spiritual body seems to take birth and grow as He displays His variegated pastimes. The Lord could hardly allow His boyhood to pass without exhibiting the supreme loving affairs between a young boy and young girls. Thus ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura quotes Shrila Rupa Gosvami as follows: kaiShoram saphali-karoti kalayan kunje viharam harih. “Lord Hari perfects His youth by arranging loving pastimes in the groves of the Vrndavana forest.”

Text 2

Translation
The moon then rose, anointing the face of the eastern horizon with the reddish hue of his comforting rays, and thus dispelling the pain of all who watched him rise. The moon was like a beloved husband who returns after a long absence and adorns the face of his beloved wife with red kunkuma.

Purport
Young Krishna engaged His internal potency, and she immediately created an exciting atmosphere for conjugal love.

Text 3

Translation
Lord Krishna saw the unbroken disk of the full moon glowing with the red effulgence of newly applied vermilion, as if it were the face of the goddess of fortune. He also saw the kumuda lotuses opening in response to the moon's presence and the forest gently illumined by its rays. Thus the Lord began to play sweetly on His flute, attracting the minds of the beautiful-eyed gopis.

Purport
The word jagau in this verse indicates that Lord Krishna played songs on His flute, as confirmed in text 40 by the words ka stry anga te kala-padayata-venu-gita. The word rama may indicate not only Lord Vishnu's consort but also Shrimati Radharani, the original goddess of fortune. Lord Krishna appeared in the dynasty of the moon-god, and the moon plays a prominent role here in preparing for the Lord's entrance into the midst of the rasa dance.

Text 4

Translation
When the young women of Vrndavana heard Krishna's flute-song, which arouses romantic feelings, their minds were captivated by the Lord. They went to where their lover waited, each unknown to the others, moving so quickly that their earrings swung back and forth.

Purport
Apparently each gopi went secretly, hoping to avoid advertising to her rivals the fact that young Krishna was in the mood for romantic affairs. Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti poetically describes the situation as follows:

“Krishna instigated a terrible act of thievery in Vrndavana when He played on His flute. The song of His flute entered through the ears of the gopis, into the inner treasure-chamber of their hearts. That wonderful music stole all their most valuable possessions — their sobriety, shyness, fear and discrimination, along with their very minds — and in a split second this music delivered all these goods to Krishna. Now each gopi went to beg the Lord to return her personal property. Each beautiful young girl was thinking, 'I have to capture that great thief,' and thus they went forward, each unknown to the others.”

Text 5

Translation
Some of the gopis were milking cows when they heard Krishna's flute. They stopped milking and went off to meet Him. Some left milk curdling on the stove, and others left cakes burning in the oven.

Purport
The eagerness of these cowherd girls, so lovingly devoted to young Krishna, is shown here.

Texts 6-7

Translation
Some of them were getting dressed, feeding milk to their infants or rendering personal service to their husbands, but they all gave up these duties and went to meet Krishna. Other gopis were taking their evening meals, washing themselves, putting on cosmetics or applying kajjala to their eyes. But all the gopis stopped these activities at once and, though their clothes and ornaments were in complete disarray, rushed off to Krishna.

Text 8

Translation
Their husbands, fathers, brothers and other relatives tried to stop them, but Krishna had already stolen their hearts. Enchanted by the sound of His flute, they refused to turn back.

Purport
Some of the young gopis were married, and their husbands tried to stop them. The unmarried girls had to deal with their fathers and brothers and other relatives. None of these relatives would have ordinarily allowed even the young girls' dead bodies to go alone into the forest at night, but Lord Krishna had already engaged His internal potency, and thus the entire romantic episode unfolded without interference.

Text 9

Translation
Some of the gopis, however, could not manage to get out of their houses, and instead they remained home with eyes closed, meditating upon Him in pure love.

Purport
Throughout the Tenth Canto, Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura gives elaborate poetic commentaries on Lord Krishna's pastimes. It is not always possible to include these extensive descriptions, but we will quote in its entirety his comments on this verse. It is our sincere recommendation to the learned Vaishnava community that a qualified devotee of the Lord present the entire commentary of Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti on the Tenth Canto as a separate book, which will undoubtedly be appreciated by devotees and nondevotees alike. The acarya's comments on this verse are as follows:

“In this context we will make our analysis according to the method described in Shrila Rupa Gosvami's Ujjvala-nilamani. There are two categories of gopis: the eternally perfect (the nitya-siddhas) and those who have become perfect by practicing bhakti-yoga (the sadhana-siddhas). The sadhana-siddhas are of two categories: those who belong to special groups and those who do not. And there are also two classes of the gopis belonging to special groups: namely the Shruti-caris, who come from the group of the personified Vedas, and the rshi-caris, who come from the group of sages who saw Lord Ramacandra in the Dandakaranya forest.

“This same fourfold categorization of the gopis is given in the Padma Purana:

gopyas tu Shrutayo jneya
rshi-ja gopa-kanyakah
deva-kanyaSh ca rajendra
na manushyah kathancana

'It is understood that some of the gopis are personified Vedic literatures, while others are reborn sages, daughters of cowherds, or demigod maidens. But by no means, my dear King, are any of them ordinary humans.' Here we are informed that although the gopis appeared to be human cowherd girls, they actually were not. Thus the contention that they are mortals is refuted.

“The daughters of cowherds, referred to here as gopa-kanyas, must be eternally perfect, since we never hear of them having executed any sadhana. Their apparent sadhana of worshiping goddess Katyayani in the role of gopis merely manifests their manner of playing like human beings, and the Bhagavatam narrates the account of this worship only to show how they had fully taken on the role of cowherd girls.

“That the gopa-kanya gopis are actually nitya-siddhas, eternally perfect devotees of the Lord, is established by a statement in Brahma-samhita (5.37) — ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhih — which proves that they are the Lord's spiritual pleasure potency. Similarly, we have the words of the Gautamiya-tantra, hladini ya maha-Shaktih. Further corroboration of their eternal perfection is that these gopis, being coeternal with Lord Krishna, their lover, are mentioned along with Him in the eighteen-syllable mantra, the ten-syllable mantra and others, and also that the worship of these mantras, and also the Shrutis that present them, have been in existence since beginningless time.”

The deva-kanyas, daughters of the demigods, who are mentioned in the verse beginning sambhavas tv amara-striyah, are explained in Shri Ujjvala-nilamani as partial expansions of the gopis who are eternally perfect. That the Shruti-cari gopis, the personified Vedas, are sadhana-siddha is understood from the following words of theirs quoted in the Brhad-vamana Purana:

kandarpa-koti-lavanye
tvayi drshte manamsi nah
kamini-bhavam asadya
smara-kshubdhanya-samShayah

yatha tval-loka-vasinyah
kama-tattvena gopikah
bhajanti ramanam matva
cikirshajaninas tatha

'Since we have seen Your face, which possesses the beauty of millions of Cupids, our minds have become lusty after You like those of young girls, and we have forgotten all other allurements. We have developed the desire to act toward You as do the gopis who dwell on Your transcendental planet and who manifest the nature of Cupid by worshiping You with the idea that You are their paramour.'

“The rshi-cari gopis are also sadhana-siddha, as stated in Ujjvala-nilamani: gopalopasakah purvam apraptabhishta-siddhayah. Previously they were all maharshis living in the Dandaka forest. We find evidence for this in the Padma Purana, Uttara-khanda:

drshtva ramam harim tatra
bhoktum aicchan su-vigraham
te sarve stritvam apannah
samudbhutaSh ca gokule
harim samprapya kamena
tato mukta bhavarnavat

This verse says that upon seeing Lord Ramacandra, the sages in the Dandaka forest desired to enjoy Lord Hari (Krishna). In other words, the sight of Lord Rama's beauty reminded them of Lord Hari, Gopala, their personal object of worship, and they then wanted to enjoy with Him. But out of embarrassment they did not act on that desire, whereupon Lord Shri Rama, who is like a desire tree, gave His mercy to them, even though they had not voiced their request. Thus their desire was fulfilled, as stated by the words beginning te sarve. By means of their lusty attraction they became freed from the ocean of material existence, the cycle of birth and death, and coincidentally they got the association of Hari in conjugal love.

“In the present verse of the Bhagavatam we understand that it was the gopis who had children who were kept forcibly at home. This fact is clear from verses yet to come: matarah pitarah putrah (Bhag. 10.29.20), yat-paty-apatya-suhrdam anuvrttir anga (Bhag. 10.29.32) and pati-sutanvaya-bhratr-bandhavan (Bhag. 10.31.16). In his comments on the Tenth Canto, Shrila Kavi-karnapura Gosvami mentions this fact. Without trying to repeat all his thoughts on this verse, we will give the gist of his purport:

“'Upon seeing the personal form of Lord Shri Ramacandra, the sages who were worshipers of Lord Gopala immediately became elevated to the mature platform of spontaneous devotion, automatically reaching the stages of firm faith, attraction and attachment. But they had not yet completely freed themselves of all material contamination; therefore Shri Yoga-maya-devi arranged for them to take birth from the wombs of gopis and become cowherd girls. By associating with the eternally perfect gopis, some of these new gopis fully manifested purva-raga loving attraction for Krishna as soon as they reached puberty. (This kind of attraction develops even before one meets the beloved.) When these new gopis got the direct audience of Krishna and physically associated with Him, all their remaining contamination became burned up, and they achieved the advanced stages of prema, sneha and so on.

“'Even though they were in the company of their cowherd husbands, by the power of Yoga-maya the gopis remained unsullied by sexual contact with them; rather, they were situated in purely spiritual bodies that Krishna enjoyed. On the night they heard the sound of Krishna's flute, their husbands tried to stop them, but by the merciful assistance of Yoga-maya the sadhana-siddha gopis were able to go forth to their beloved, together with the nitya-siddha gopis.

“'Other gopis, however, because of not getting the good fortune of associating with the nitya-siddha gopis and other advanced gopis, had not achieved the stage of prema, and so their contamination was not completely burned away. They entered the company of their cowherd husbands and, after sexual union with them, gave birth to children. But a short time later even these gopis developed their purva-raga by hankering intensely for the physical association of Krishna — a hankering they acquired by associating with the advanced gopis. Becoming worthy recipients of the mercy of the perfected gopis, they assumed transcendental bodies fit to be enjoyed by Krishna, and when Yoga-maya failed to help them overcome their husbands' attempts to keep them from going out, they felt themselves cast into the worst calamity. Viewing their husbands, brothers, fathers and other family members as enemies, they came close to dying. Just as other women might remember their mothers or other relatives at the time of death, these gopis remembered the sole friend of their very life, Krishna, as stated in the present verse of the Bhagavatam, beginning with the word antar.

“'It is implied that those ladies were not able to exit because they were held back by their husbands, who were standing before them with sticks in their hands, scolding them. Although these gopis were perpetually absorbed in love for Krishna, at that particular time they meditated upon Him and cried out within: “Alas, alas, O only friend of our life! O ocean of the artistic skills of Vrndavana forest! Please let us become your girlfriends in some future life, because at this time we cannot see Your lotuslike face with our eyes. So be it; we shall look upon You with our minds.” Each of them lamenting to herself in this way, the gopis stood with their eyes shut and meditated deeply upon Him.'”

Texts 10-11

Translation
For those gopis who could not go to see Krishna, intolerable separation from their beloved caused an intense agony that burned away all impious karma. By meditating upon Him they realized His embrace, and the ecstasy they then felt exhausted their material piety. Although Lord Krishna is the Supreme Soul, these girls simply thought of Him as their male lover and associated with Him in that intimate mood. Thus their karmic bondage was nullified and they abandoned their gross material bodies.

Purport
Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti comments upon this verse as follows: “Here Shukadeva Gosvami speaks in a peculiar way: he presents the intimate object the gopis attained as if it were an external idea, thus keeping its true nature secret from outsiders, while at the same time he reveals to the confidential devotees well versed in the scientific conclusions of devotional service the internal meaning that is his real purport. Thus to outsiders Shukadeva says that Krishna gave the gopis liberation, but to the confidential hearers Shukadeva reveals that when the gopis experienced separation from their beloved there arose in them both immeasurable unhappiness and immeasurable happiness, and that they gradually achieved their desired goal.

“Thus the verse can be understood as follows: Because of their intolerable separation from their beloved, the gopis felt terrible agony, by which they caused all inauspicious things to tremble. In other words, when people in general hear of the gopis' extreme agony in separation from their beloved, they abandon thousands of inauspicious things — things even as fearsome as the subterranean fires of millions of universes or the powerful poison swallowed by Lord Shiva. More specifically, those who hear of the gopis' love in separation give up their terrible false ego and, thinking themselves defeated, are shaken. When the gopis meditated on Lord Acyuta, He became manifest and personally came to them, and they experienced great joy by embracing His body, which was full of transcendental love for them. The gopis also experienced great joy by exhibiting personal characteristics and a sense of identification appropriate to such love. That joy made all their good fortune, both material and spiritual, seem paltry by comparison.

“The implication is that when other persons see how happy the gopis became upon embracing Krishna when He manifested Himself directly before them, these other persons feel that thousands of so-called auspicious objects are insignificant by comparison, including all the sense gratificatory pleasures found in millions of universes and even the supersensory pleasure of spiritual bliss (brahmananda). Thus hearing of the gopis' distress and the joy that arose, respectively, out of their separation from the Supreme Lord and their union with Him, anyone can get rid of all the reactions of his past activities, both sinful and pious. Vaishnavas certainly do not think that sinful and pious reactions can be destroyed only by being lived out, since, after all, neither separation from the Supreme Lord nor direct association with Him are in the category of karma. This kind of elimination of karmic reactions occurs in the stage of bhajana, for those who have come to the level of anartha-nivrtti.

“And thus the gopis thought of Krishna — the Paramatma, or supreme worthy object of all love — as their paramour. Even though such a concept is ordinarily contemptible, the gopis realized Krishna in an even fuller sense than did Rukmini and His other queens, who thought of Him most respectfully as their husband. That thinking of the Lord as one's paramour is superior to thinking of Him as one's husband is proved by the fact that unbridled pure love is superior to domesticated love. This idea is borne out by the following words of Shri Uddhava: ya dustyajam sva-janam arya-patham ca hitva. 'These ladies of Vraja abandoned their families and their advanced religious principles, even though to do so is very difficult.' (Bhag. 10.47.61)

“In His pastimes on earth Krishna often turns the most lowly things into the most elevated. As Bhishma stated, Krishna's pastime of acting as Arjuna's chariot driver was even more elevated than the pastimes in which He acted as a mighty King of kings: vijaya-ratha-kutumba atta-totre/ dhrta-haya-raShmini tac-chriyeskshaniye. 'I concentrate upon the chariot driver of Arjuna, who stood with a whip in His right hand and a bridle rope in His left, and who was very careful to protect Arjuna's chariot by all means.' (Bhag. 1.9.39) Similarly, in the Lord's appearance as Krishna we see that the normally inferior conjugal rasa becomes better than the normally superior mood of Shanta-rasa, as also the attitude of loving a paramour becomes superior to the loving exchange between legitimate spouses, and lowly gunja necklaces, red oxide paste and peacock feathers become better than the most excellent jeweled ornaments.

“But, it may be objected, it is not fitting for the Supreme Lord to sport with women whose bodies have already been enjoyed by other men. This objection is replied to by the words beginning jahuh. The word deham is used here in the singular form to indicate unity of category, even though the gopis are many. Some authorities say that by the power of Yoga-maya these gopis' bodies disappeared in a way no one noticed, but other authorities say that the 'body' referred to in this context is the inferior body, composed of the modes of material nature. Thus by the prominence of the adjective guna-mayam, it is understood that before the gopis heard the sound of Krishna's flute their bodies had been twofold, material and spiritual, and upon hearing the flute they gave up the material bodies, which their husbands had enjoyed. We may analyze this as follows:

“When devotees begin prosecuting devotional service in accordance with the instructions of a bona fide spiritual master, they engage their ears and other senses in pure devotion by hearing of the Lord, chanting His glories, remembering Him, offering obeisances to Him, giving Him personal attendance, and so forth. Thus the devotees make the Lord's transcendental qualities the objects of their senses, as stated by the Lord Himself: nirguno mad-apaShrayah. (Bhag. 11.25.26) In this way the devotees' bodies transcend the material modes. Yet sometimes the devotees may take as their sense objects mundane sounds and so on, and that is material. Thus a devotee's body can have two aspects, transcendental and material.

“According to one's level of devotional service, to that degree the transcendental aspects of one's body become prominent and the material aspects diminish. This transformation is described in the following verse from the Bhagavatam (11.2.42):

bhaktih pareShanubhavo viraktir
anyatra caisha trika eka-kalah
prapadyamanasya yathaShnatah syus
tushtih pushtih kshud-apayo 'nu-ghasam

'Devotion, direct experience of the Supreme Lord, and detachment from other things — these three occur simultaneously for one who has taken shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the same way that pleasure, nourishment and relief from hunger come simultaneously and increasingly, with each bite, for a person engaged in eating.' When one achieves totally pure love of God, the material portions of the body disappear and the body becomes completely spiritual. Nonetheless, so as not to disturb the false opinions of atheists and so as to protect the confidentiality of devotional service, the Supreme Lord usually has His illusory energy exhibit the demise of the gross body. An example of this is the disappearance of the Yadavas during the Maushala-lila.

“Sometimes, however, to proclaim the excellence of bhakti-yoga, Krishna will allow a devotee to go back to Godhead in his selfsame body, as in the case of Dhruva Maharaja. We can cite evidence for this point from the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Eleventh Canto, text 32:

yeneme nirjitah saumya
guna jivena citta-jah
bhakti-yogena man-nishtho
mad-bhavaya prapadyate

'A living entity who conquers the modes of material nature, which are manifested from the mind, can dedicate himself to Me [Krishna] by the process of devotional service and thus attain pure love for Me.' Here the Lord states that the defeat and destruction of that which is composed of the modes of material nature can be brought about only by the process of devotional service.

“Therefore, what we should understand from the present verse of the Bhagavatam is that the gopis who could not go to see Krishna had their inauspicious, material bodies removed or burned up, while their auspicious, spiritual bodies, far from being destroyed, simply grew more prominent because of the ecstasy the gopis felt by embracing Krishna in meditation. Thus their bondage was completely destroyed: by the help of Yoga-maya they got free from ignorance and also from the prohibitions of their husbands and other relatives.

“We should not make the mistake of explaining this falling away of the gopis' bodies as being a result of their dying. As the Lord Himself states (Bhag. 10.47.37):

ya maya kridata ratryam
vane 'smin vraja asthitah
alabdha-rasah kalyanyo
mapur mad-virya-cintaya

'Some of those all-auspcious gopis could not directly join Me in enjoying the rasa dance on that night in this Vrndavana forest, yet still they achieved My association by remembering My transcendental pastimes.' By using the word kalyanyah in this verse, the Lord implies, 'Even though these gopis wanted to give up their bodies because of their husbands' prohibitions and the torment of separation from Me, for them to die at the very beginning of the most auspicious festival of the rasa dance would have been displeasing to Me and thus inauspicious. So they did not die.'

“More evidence that the gopis who were prevented from going to see Krishna did not physically die is provided by a statement of Shri Shukadeva's later in this canto (10.47.38): ta ucur uddhavam pritas tat-sandeShagata-smrtih. 'Then they [the gopis] replied to Uddhava, feeling satisfied because His message had reminded them of Krishna.' Here we understand that the gopis speaking to Uddhava were the ones who had not had the chance to participate directly in the rasa dance because of being held captive in their homes. Thus the conclusion is that they gave up their material bodies without dying. Parched by the intense heat of separation, their material bodies gave up their materiality and became purely spiritual, just like the bodies of such great devotees as Dhruva Maharaja. This is the meaning of the gopis' 'giving up their bodies.'

“The following analogy illustrates the statuses of the various gopis: By observing seven or eight ripe mangoes on a tree, we can ascertain that all the fruits on the tree are ripe. Then we can pick them all and bring them home, where in due course the sun's rays and other agents will make them fine-looking, fragrant and delicious — fit to be offered to the king for his enjoyment. When the time comes for the king to take his meal, a discriminating servant can choose those fruits ready to offer him. From the appearance of the fruits the servant can tell which are ripe in the middle but still raw on the outside and thus not yet fit for the king. By the application of a special heating process, these remaining fruits will become ripe in two or three days, and then they too will be ready to offer to the king.

“Similarly, among the muni-cari gopis who took birth in Gokula, those who completely gave up the materiality of their bodies and very early in life achieved purely spiritual bodies were able to remain untouched by any other man; thus Yoga-maya allowed them to join the nitya-siddha and other advanced gopis when they went to meet Krishna. Other muni-cari gopis still retained some connection with the external material body, but even they, after being parched by the heat of separation from Shri Krishna, gave up the materiality of their bodies and assumed perfectly transcendental bodies, purified of all taint of contact with other men. On the night of the rasa dance, Yoga-maya sent some of these gopis out behind those who had already gone out; others, who Yoga-maya saw still had a slight amount of contamination, she kept back to further purify with the heat of separation, and then she sent them out on some other night.

“After enjoying the pleasures of the rasa dance and other pastimes with Krishna, the muni-cari gopis who had participated went back to their homes when the night was over, as did the nitya-siddha and other advanced gopis. But now Yoga-maya protected these muni-cari gopis from the material association of their husbands; in other words, these gopis were devoid of any selfish attachment for husband, children and so on. Since these gopis were thoroughly immersed in the great ocean of love for Krishna, their breasts dried up so that they could not feed their infants, and to their family members they appeared as if haunted by ghosts. In conclusion, it is not unseemly that the gopis who were previously in material association joined in the rasa dance.

“Some authorities, however, maintain that the gopis who were kept back in their houses did not have children. According to them, whenever such words as apatya ('children') are used in verses yet to come, these words refer to the children of co-wives, to adopted children or to nephews and nieces.”

Text 12

Translation
Shri Parikshit Maharaja said: O sage, the gopis knew Krishna only as their lover, not as the Supreme Absolute Truth. So how could these girls, their minds caught up in the waves of the modes of nature, free themselves from material attachment?

Purport
King Parikshit was sitting in an assembly of great sages and other important personalities, listening to the words of Shukadeva Gosvami. According to Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti, as Shukadeva began speaking of the gopis' conjugal love for Krishna, the King noticed the expressions on the faces of some of the more materialistic persons present there and realized the doubt lurking in their hearts. Therefore, although the King thoroughly knew the purport of Shukadeva's words, he presented himself as experiencing personal doubt so that he could eradicate the doubt of others. That is why he asked this question.

Text 13

Translation
Shukadeva Gosvami said: This point was explained to you previously. Since even ShiShupala, who hated Krishna, achieved perfection, then what to speak of the Lord's dear devotees.

Purport
Although the spiritual nature of conditioned souls may be covered by illusion, Lord Krishna's spiritual nature is omnipotent and is never covered by any other power. In fact, all other powers are His energy and thus function according to His will. The Brahma-samhita (5.44) states, srshti sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-Shaktir eka/ chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti durga/ icchanurupam api yasya ca ceshtate sa: “The mighty Durga, who creates, maintains and annihilates the material worlds, is the potency of the Supreme Lord, and she moves like His shadow, according to His desire.” Thus because the Lord's spiritual influence does not depend on whether someone understands Him or not, the gopis' spontaneous love for Krishna guaranteed their spiritual perfection.

The great Madhvacarya quotes the following relevant passages from the Skanda Purana:

Krishna-kamas tada gopyas
tyaktva deham divam gatah
samyak Krishnam para-brahma
jnatva kalat param yayuh

“At that time the gopis, who desired Krishna, gave up their bodies and went to the spiritual world. Because they properly understood Krishna to be the Supreme Absolute Truth, they transcended the influence of time.”

purvam ca jnana-samyuktas
tatrapi prayaShas tatha
atas tasam param brahma
gatir asin na kamatah

“In their previous lives most of the gopis were already fully endowed with transcendental knowledge. It is because of this knowledge, not their lust, that they were able to attain the Supreme Brahman.”

na tu jnanam rte moksho
nanyah pantheti hi Shrutih
kama-yukta tada bhaktir
jnanam cato vimukti-gah

“The Vedas declare that without spiritual knowledge there is no valid path to liberation. Because these apparently lusty gopis possessed devotion and knowledge, they achieved liberation.”

ato mokshe 'pi tasam ca
kamo bhaktyanuvartate
mukti-Shabdodito caidya-
prabhrtau dvesha-bhaginah

“Thus even in their attainment of liberation, 'lust' followed as a manifestation of their pure devotion. After all, what we call liberation was experienced even by envious persons like ShiShupala.”

bhakti-margi prthan muktim
agad vishnu-prasadatah
kamas tv aShubha-krc capi
bhaktya vishnoh prasada-krt

“By the mercy of Lord Vishnu, one who follows the path of devotional service gains liberation as a by-product, and such a person's lusty desire, which would normally invoke misfortune, instead invokes the mercy of Vishnu when exhibited in pure devotion.”

dveshi-jiva-yutam capi
bhaktam vishnur vimocayet
aho 'ti-karuna vishnoh
ShiShupalasya mokshanat

“Lord Vishnu will save even a devotee possessed of an envious life. Just see the extreme mercy of the Lord, as shown by His granting liberation to ShiShupala!”

ShiShupala was Lord Krishna's cousin. He was mortified when the Lord stole the gorgeous young Rukmini, whom ShiShupala himself was hell-bent on marrying. For various other reasons also, ShiShupala was consumed with envy of Lord Krishna, and finally he insanely offended Him in a great assembly called the Rajasuya sacrifice. At that time Krishna nonchalantly cut off ShiShupala's head and gave him liberation. Everyone present saw the effulgent soul of ShiShupala rise out of his dead body and merge into the existence of the Lord. The Seventh Canto explains that ShiShupala was an incarnation of a gatekeeper in the spiritual world cursed to take birth on the earth as a demon. Since even ShiShupala was liberated by the Lord, who took into consideration the whole situation, then what to speak of the gopis, who loved Krishna more than anything.

Text 14

Translation
O King, the Supreme Lord is inexhaustible and immeasurable, and He is untouched by the material modes because He is their controller. His personal appearance in this world is meant for bestowing the highest benefit on humanity.

Purport
Since Lord Krishna descends to benefit mankind in general, why would He neglect innocent young girls who loved Him more than anyone else did? Although the Lord awards Himself to His pure devotees, He is avyaya, inexhaustible, because He is aprameya, immeasurable. He is also nirguna, free of material qualities, and thus those who intimately associate with Him are on the same spiritual platform. He is gunatma, the controller or original personality behind the modes of nature, and it is specifically for this reason that He is free of them. In other words, because the modes of nature are His energy, they cannot act upon Him.

Text 15

Translation
Persons who constantly direct their lust, anger, fear, protective affection, feeling of impersonal oneness or friendship toward Lord Hari are sure to become absorbed in thought of Him.

Purport
Lord Krishna is pure spiritual existence, and those who somehow or other become attached to Him, absorbed in thoughts of Him, rise to the spiritual platform. This is the absolute nature of the Lord's personal association.

With this verse Shukadeva Gosvami answers King Parikshit's question about the gopis. After all, Shukadeva has begun to narrate Krishna's most intimate pastime, the rasa dance, and Parikshit is cooperating to remove the doubts of others who are hearing or who in the future may hear this astonishing story. Shrila Madhvacarya has quoted a statement from the Skanda Purana that emphatically declares persons like the gopis to be liberated souls, beyond the pale of material illusion:

bhaktya hi nitya-kamitvam
na tu muktim vina bhavet
atah kamitaya vapi
muktir bhaktimatam harau

“Eternal conjugal attraction to Krishna, expressed in pure devotional service, cannot develop in one who is not already liberated. Thus those who are devoted to Lord Hari, even in conjugal attraction, are already liberated.

“Shrila Madhvacarya then quotes from the Padma Purana to clarify the essential point that one cannot be liberated simply by lusting after Lord Krishna but rather only by possessing conjugal attraction in pure devotional service:

sneha-bhaktah sada devah
kamitsenapsara-striyah
kascit kascin na kamena
bhaktya kevalayaiva tu

“The demigods are always affectionately devoted to the Lord, and the young ladies of heaven called Apsaras have lusty feelings toward Him, although some of them have pure devotion for Him untainted by material lust. Only these latter Apsaras are ready for liberation, because without bona fide devotional service one cannot possibly achieve liberation.”

Thus devotional service is not yogyam, or appropriate, unless free from material lust. One should not take cheaply the gopis' achievement of personal association with Lord Krishna in a conjugal relationship. To show the gravity of direct relationship with the Lord, Shrila Madhvacarya has quoted the following verses from the Varaha Purana:

patitvena Shriyopasyo
brahmana me piteti ca
pitamahatayanyesham
tridaShanam janardanah

“The goddess Lakshmi worships Lord Janardana as her husband, Lord Brahma worships Him as his father, and the other demigods worship Him as their grandfather.”

prapitamaho me bhagavan
iti sarva-janasya tu
guruh Shri-brahmano vishnuh
suranam ca guror guruh

“Thus people in general should think, 'The Supreme Lord is my great-grandfather.' Lord Vishnu is the spiritual master of Brahma and thus the guru of the guru of the demigods.”

gurur brahmasya jagato
daivam vishnuh sanatanah
ity evopasanam karyam
nanyatha tu kathancana

“Brahma is the spiritual master of this universe, and Vishnu is the eternally worshipable Deity. With this understanding, and not otherwise, one should worship the Lord.”

The above injunctions apply to sarva-jana, “all people in general.” Thus one should follow these injunctions until one achieves the exalted platform of intimate relationship with the Supreme Lord. There is abundant evidence that the gopis of Vrndavana were highly elevated, liberated souls, and thus their pastimes with Krishna are pure, spiritual affairs. Keeping this in mind, we can truly understand this chapter of the Shrimad-Bhagavatam.

Text 16

Translation
You should not be so astonished by Krishna, the unborn master of all masters of mystic power, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After all, it is the Lord who liberates this world.

Purport
Parikshit Maharaja should not have been so astonished that Lord Krishna's so-called romantic affairs are in fact meant to liberate the entire universe. After all, that is the Lord's purpose — to bring all conditioned souls back home, back to Godhead, for an eternal life of bliss and knowledge. The Lord's conjugal affairs with the gopis fit in very nicely with that program because we who are actually lusty in material consciousness can be purified and liberated by hearing of them.

In the First Canto of Shrimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.33), Narada Muni states:

amayo yaSh ca bhutanam
jayate yena su-vrata
tad eva hy amayam dravyam
na punati cikitsitam

“O good soul, does not a thing applied therapeutically cure a disease that was caused by that very same thing?” Thus Krishna's romantic affairs, being pure, spiritual activities, will cure those who hear about them of the disease of material lust.

Text 17

Translation
Seeing that the girls of Vraja had arrived, Lord Krishna, the best of speakers, greeted them with charming words that bewildered their minds.

Purport
Having established the spiritual nature of the gopis' love for Krishna, Shukadeva Gosvami proceeds with his narration.

Text 18

Translation
Lord Krishna said: O most fortunate ladies, welcome. What may I do to please you? Is everything well in Vraja? Please tell Me the reason for your coming here.

Purport
Lord Krishna knew perfectly well why the gopis had come. In fact, He had called them with the romantic melodies of His flute. So Krishna was simply teasing the gopis by asking them, “Why have you come here so quickly? Is something wrong in town? Why have you come here, anyway? What do you want?”

The gopis were Krishna's young lovers, and therefore these questions certainly bewildered them, for they had responded to Krishna's call with the simple mentality of enjoying conjugal love with Him.

Text 19

Translation
This night is quite frightening, and frightening creatures are lurking about. Return to Vraja, slender-waisted girls. This is not a proper place for women.

Purport
Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura has written the following charming commentary on this verse:

“[The gopis thought,] 'Alas, alas, even after shattering our family responsibilities, our sobriety and our shame and enjoying us day after day, and after now dragging us here by the sound of His flute, He is asking us why we have come!'

“As the gopis cast sidelong glances at one another, the Lord said, 'If you try to tell Me that you have come to get night-blooming flowers to use in the worship of God, and that it is these flowers you are looking at with your sidelong glances, I will have to reject your excuse as unacceptable, since neither the time, place nor persons involved are appropriate.'

“This is the Lord's meaning in the verse beginning rajani. He might have said, 'Even though there is abundant moonlight, this time of night is very fearsome because many snakes, scorpions and other dangerous creatures too small for you to see are lying beneath the creepers, roots and twigs. Therefore this time is unsuitable for gathering flowers. And not only the time but also this place is unsuitable for you to gather flowers, because at night terrible creatures such as tigers are abroad here. Therefore you should go back to Vraja.'

“'But,' the gopis may object, 'let us just rest for a few minutes, and then we will go.'

“Then the Lord might reply, 'Women shouldn't remain in this kind of place.' In other words, 'Because of the time and place, it is wrong for persons like yourselves to stay here even for a moment.'

“Furthermore, by the word su-madhyamah, 'O slender-waisted ones,' the Lord implied, 'You are beautiful young girls, and I am a beautiful young boy. Because you are all very chaste and I am a brahmacari, as confirmed by the words krshno brahmacari in the Shruti [Gopala-tapani Upanishad], there should be no fault in our being in the same place. Nonetheless, the mind can never be trusted — neither yours nor My own.'

“The Lord's inner eagerness thus hinted at is obvious if we read His words between the lines, as follows: 'If out of shyness you cannot tell Me the reason you've come, then don't speak. I already know it anyway, so just listen as I tell it to you.' Thus the Lord speaks the words beginning rajani.”

The following statement by Krishna is based on an alternative meaning of the verse derived when the Sanskrit words are separated in a different way. The alternative separation, according to Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti, would be rajani esha aghora-rupa aghora-sattva-nishevita/ pratiyata vrajam na iha stheyam stribhih su-madhyamah. Through Shrila ViShvanatha's commentary Krishna now explains the meaning of this division of words.

“'The pervasive moonshine has made this night appear not at all fearsome, and therefore this forest is populated by harmless creatures such as deer (aghora-sattvaih), or else by animals such as tigers that are harmless because of Vrndavana's naturally nonviolent atmosphere. Consequently this night should not frighten you.' Or else Krishna may have meant, 'You should not be afraid of your own husbands and other relatives because, the night being populated by fearsome animals, they will not come near this place. Therefore please do not go back to Vraja [na pratiyata], but stay here in My company [iha stheyam].'

“The gopis may ask the Lord, 'How are You staying here?'

“The Lord answers, 'With women.'

“But are You satisfied to keep just any women in Your company?'

“The Lord replies to this with the word su-madhyamah, meaning, 'Only women who are young and beautiful, who have slender waists — namely yourselves — should stay here with Me, and not others.' Thus we can appreciate that Krishna's statements are full of considerate as well as neglectful sentiments.”

Krishna's words are certainly brilliant, because according to the rules of Sanskrit grammar they may be understood in either of two opposite ways. In the first case, as translated above, Lord Krishna continues to tease the gopis by telling them the night is dangerous and inauspicious and that they should go home. But Krishna is simultaneously saying exactly the opposite — namely, that there is absolutely no reason for the gopis to fear coming to the Lord, that the night is quite auspicious and that the girls should under no circumstances go back home. Thus Lord Krishna simultaneously teases and enchants the gopis with His words.

Text 20

Translation
Not finding you at home, your mothers, fathers, sons, brothers and husbands are certainly searching for you. Don't cause anxiety for your family members.

Texts 21-22

Translation
Now you have seen this Vrndavana forest, full of flowers and resplendent with the light of the full moon. You have seen the beauty of the trees, with their leaves trembling in the gentle breeze coming from the Yamuna. So now go back to the cowherd village. Don't delay. O chaste ladies, serve your husbands and give milk to your crying babies and calves.

Purport
Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura further explains text 22 as follows: “Lord Krishna says, 'Therefore don't wait a long time before going, but go immediately.' The word satih means that the gopis are loyal to their husbands; therefore Krishna indicates that the gopis should serve their husbands so the latter can accomplish their religious duties, and that the gopis should also be considered worshipable because of their chastity. All this Krishna says to the gopis who are married. And now to the unmarried girls He says, 'The calves are crying, so see to it that they get milk.' To the muni-cari gopis He says, 'Your babies are crying, so feed them milk.'”

Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura further reveals the hidden meaning of these two verses as follows: “In text 21 Krishna might have said, 'This Vrndavana is the very best of places, and moreover this is a full-moon night. Furthermore, we have the Yamuna on all sides, and there are cool, gentle, fragrant breezes blowing. These are all transcendental opulences that stimulate loving exchanges, and since I am also here as the foremost ecstatic opulence — the object of love — let us now test how much expertise you can show in relishing rasas.'

“In text 22 He means to say, 'Thus for a long time, for the entire duration of this night, don't leave, but rather stay here and enjoy with Me. Don't go serve your husbands and the gentle women — your mothers-in-law and so forth. It would not be fitting for you to waste such beauty and youth, which are gifts of the creator. Nor should you milk the cows or give milk to the calves and babies. What do you, who are so full of ecstatic attraction for Me, have to do with these affairs?'”

Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura also explains that the gopis could not really be sure exactly what Krishna was doing — whether He was merely joking, inviting them to stay or instructing them to return home. Thus as Shri Krishna spoke about the beauty of the forest, the gopis felt embarrassed and bewildered and looked upward at the trees, and as He spoke about the Yamuna they looked all around at the river. Their absolute purity and simplicity, along with their absolute devotion to Lord Krishna in the conjugal mood, created the most beautiful pastimes ever exhibited in this universe.

Text 23

Translation
On the other hand, perhaps you have come here out of your great love for Me, which has taken control of your hearts. This is of course quite commendable on your part, since all living entities possess natural affection for Me.

Text 24

Translation
The highest religious duty for a woman is to sincerely serve her husband, behave well toward her husband's family and take good care of her children.

Purport
Shrila Jiva Gosvami astutely points out here that the gopis' real, eternal husband is Lord Krishna, not their so-called husbands at home, who falsely considered the gopis their property. Thus a strict interpretation of the word amayaya, “without illusion,” reveals that the supreme religious duty for the gopis is to serve Shri Krishna, their real lover.

Text 25

Translation
Women who desire a good destination in the next life should never abandon a husband who has not fallen from his religious standards, even if he is obnoxious, unfortunate, old, unintelligent, sickly or poor.

Purport
Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti quotes a similar statement from smrti-Shastra: patim tv apatitam bhajet. “One should serve a master who is not fallen.” Sometimes the foolish argument is given that even if a husband falls down from spiritual principles, his wife should continue to follow him since he is her “guru.” In fact, since Krishna consciousness cannot be subordinated to any other religious principle, a guru who engages his follower in materialistic, sinful activities loses his status as a guru. Shrila Prabhupada stated that the system of monarchy collapsed in Europe because the monarchs abused and exploited their position. Similarly, in the Western world men have abused and exploited women, and now there is a popular movement in which women reject the authority of their husbands. Ideally, men should be staunch in spiritual life and give pure, sincere guidance to the women under their care.

The gopis, of course, being on the highest platform of spiritual perfection, were transcendental to all positive and negative religious considerations. In other words, they were the eternal lovers of the Absolute Truth.

Text 26

Translation
For a woman from a respectable family, petty adulterous affairs are always condemned. They bar her from heaven, ruin her reputation and bring her difficulty and fear.

Text 27

Translation
Transcendental love for Me arises by the devotional processes of hearing about Me, seeing My Deity form, meditating on Me and faithfully chanting My glories. The same result is not achieved by mere physical proximity. So please go back to your homes.

Purport
Lord Krishna is certainly presenting formidable arguments.

Text 28

Translation
Shukadeva Gosvami said: Hearing these unpleasant words spoken by Govinda, the gopis became morose. Their great hopes were frustrated and they felt insurmountable anxiety.

Purport
The gopis did not know what to do. They considered falling at Krishna's feet and crying for His mercy, or perhaps remaining aloof and going back to their homes. But they could do neither of these things and so felt great anxiety.

Text 29

Translation
Their heads hanging down and their heavy, sorrowful breathing drying up their reddened lips, the gopis scratched the ground with their toes. Tears flowed from their eyes, carrying their kajjala and washing away the vermilion smeared on their breasts. Thus they stood, silently bearing the burden of their unhappiness.

Purport
The gopis felt, “If Krishna has not been conquered by our love, then our love must not be genuine. And if we cannot properly love Krishna, what is the use of our lives?” Their reddish lips were drying up because of the hot breathing that arose from their unhappiness. When the hot sun dries ripe red bimba fruits, dark spots appear on them and they grow soft. The beautiful lips of the gopis similarly changed in appearance. They stood silently before Krishna, unable to speak.

Text 30

Translation
Although Krishna was their beloved, and although they had abandoned all other objects of desire for His sake, He had been speaking to them unfavorably. Nonetheless, they remained unflinching in their attachment to Him. Stopping their crying, they wiped their eyes and began to speak, their voices stammering with agitation.

Purport
The gopis now replied to Shri Krishna, their voices choking up with anger caused by their intense love for Him and their unwillingness to give Him up. They would not allow Him to reject them.

Text 31

Translation
The beautiful gopis said: O all-powerful one, You should not speak in this cruel way. Do not reject us, who have renounced all material enjoyment to render devotional service to Your lotus feet. Reciprocate with us, O stubborn one, just as the primeval Lord, Shri Narayana, reciprocates with His devotees in their endeavors for liberation.

Text 32

Translation
Our dear Krishna, as an expert in religion You have advised us that the proper religious duty for women is to faithfully serve their husbands, children and other relatives. We agree that this principle is valid, but actually this service should be rendered to You. After all, O Lord, You are the dearmost friend of all embodied souls. You are their most intimate relative and indeed their very Self.

Purport
Shri Krishna is the Soul of all souls, their dearmost friend and well-wisher. As stated in the Eleventh Canto of the Bhagavatam (11.5.41):

devarshi-bhutapta-nrnam pitṝnam
na kinkaro nayam rni ca rajan
sarvatmana yah Sharanam Sharanyam
gato mukundam parihrtya kartam

“O King, one who has given up all material duties and has taken full shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, who offers shelter to all, is not indebted to the demigods, great sages, ordinary living beings, relatives, friends, mankind or even one's forefathers who have passed away. Since all such classes of living entities are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, one who has surrendered to the Lord's service has no need to serve such persons separately.” Authority descends from the author of all existence, the Supreme Lord. Natural figures of authority such as husbands, mothers, government leaders and sages gain their power and authority from the Supreme Lord and should thus represent the Absolute Truth to those who follow them. If one wholeheartedly engages in loving service to the original, Supreme Truth, one need not indirectly serve the Absolute Truth through the above-mentioned secondary authorities.

Even a soul surrendered to God, however, continues to serve the spiritual master, who is a direct, not an indirect, representative of the Supreme Lord. A bona fide acarya, or spiritual master, is the transparent medium leading the disciple to the lotus feet of Krishna. All indirect authorities become obsolete when one is directly in touch with the Absolute Truth. The gopis wanted to explain this basic point to Krishna, and some of the bolder young girls among them attempted to defeat Shri Krishna with His own statements, as exemplified in this verse.

Text 33

Translation
Expert transcendentalists always direct their affection toward You because they recognize You as their true Self and eternal beloved. What use do we have for these husbands, children and relatives of ours, who simply give us trouble? Therefore, O supreme controller, grant us Your mercy. O lotus-eyed one, please do not cut down our long-cherished hope to have Your association.

Text 34

Translation
Until today our minds were absorbed in household affairs, but You easily stole both our minds and our hands away from our housework. Now our feet won't move one step from Your lotus feet. How can we go back to Vraja? What would we do there?

Purport
Shri Krishna had blown into His flute, and the intoxicating music that had come out of its holes had stolen the minds of the young gopi girls. Now they had come to see Krishna to demand back their stolen property, but they could regain their minds only if Shri Krishna accepted them and engaged with them in conjugal affairs.

Shri Krishna might have replied, “But My dear gopis, just go home for now. Let Me consider the situation for a day or two, and then I will give you back your minds.” In reply to this possible argument, the gopis state, “Our feet refuse to move even one step. So please give us back our minds and accept us, and then we will go.”

Text 35

Translation
Dear Krishna, please pour the nectar of Your lips upon the fire within our hearts — a fire You ignited with Your smiling glances and the sweet song of Your flute. If You do not, we will consign our bodies to the fire of separation from You, O friend, and thus like yogis attain to the abode of Your lotus feet by meditation.

Text 36

Translation
O lotus-eyed one, the goddess of fortune considers it a festive occasion whenever she touches the soles of Your lotus feet. You are very dear to the residents of the forest, and therefore we will also touch those lotus feet. From that time on we will be unable even to stand in the presence of any other man, for we will have been fully satisfied by You.

Text 37

Translation
Goddess Lakshmi, whose glance is sought after by the demigods with great endeavor, has achieved the unique position of always remaining on the chest of her Lord, Narayana. Still, she desires the dust of His lotus feet, even though she has to share that dust with Tulasi-devi and indeed with the Lord's many other servants. Similarly, we have approached the dust of Your lotus feet for shelter.

Purport
The gopis here point out that the dust of the Lord's feet is so ecstatic and enlivening that the goddess of fortune wants to abandon her unique position on His chest to share with many other devotees a position at His feet. Thus the gopis urge Lord Krishna not to be guilty of a double standard. Since the Lord gave the goddess of fortune a place on His chest and also allowed her to seek the dust of His lotus feet, Krishna should certainly give the same opportunity to His most loving devotees, the gopis. “After all” the gopis plead, “seeking the dust of Your lotus feet is perfectly justified, and You should encourage us in this endeavor and not try to send us away.”

Text 38

Translation
Therefore, O vanquisher of all distress, please show us mercy. To approach Your lotus feet we abandoned our families and homes, and we have no desire other than to serve You. Our hearts are burning with intense desires generated by Your beautiful smiling glances. O jewel among men, please make us Your maidservants.

Purport
When Shri Krishna was born, the sage Garga predicted that He would manifest all the opulences of the Supreme Lord Narayana. The gopis now appeal to the Lord to fulfill this prediction by being merciful and granting them direct service, just as Lord Narayana awards direct service to His loving devotees. The gopis emphasize that they did not give up their families and homes with the hope of securing a higher pleasure from Krishna. They are simply begging for service, revealing their pure-hearted devotion. The gopis think, “If in the course of Your pursuing Your happiness we somehow or other become happy by seeing Your face, what is the harm in that?”

Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti comments on the words purusha-bhushana, “O jewel among men.” The thakura states that the gopis meant to say, “O jewel of all males, please decorate our golden bodies with the dark blue gems of Your limbs.”

Text 39

Translation
Seeing Your face encircled by curling locks of hair, Your cheeks beautified by earrings, Your lips full of nectar, and Your smiling glance, and also seeing Your two imposing arms, which take away our fear, and Your chest, which is the only source of pleasure for the goddess of fortune, we must become Your maidservants.

Purport
Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura envisions the gopis' dealings with Krishna as follows:

“Krishna says, 'You want to become My servants; so do I have to buy you with some payment, or are you giving yourselves freely?'

“The gopis reply, 'Since the beginning of our youthful womanhood You have been purchasing us with a payment millions and millions of times more than enough. That payment is Your gemlike smiling glance, which constitutes a great treasure we have never heard about or seen anywhere else.'

“'When You put Your golden turban on Your head, Your maidservant will act as Your valet, pulling up the turban bit by bit until it is in just the right position. And even while You shake a chastising finger at her, trying hard to prohibit her, she will put her hand beneath Your turban and take the opportunity to glance at Your face. Thus we, Your maidservants, will relish with our eyes Your abundant sweetness.'

“Krishna says, 'Your husbands will not tolerate this behavior of ours. They will complain bitterly to King Kamsa, thus producing a fearful situation for Me and for you as well.'

“The gopis say, 'But Krishna, Your two mighty arms make us fearless, just as they did when You held up Govardhana Hill to protect us from the pride of Mahendra. Those arms will certainly kill that beast Kamsa.'

“'But being a religious person, I cannot make others' wives My maidservants.'

“'O dear crest jewel of religious personalities, You may say that You refuse to make the cowherds' wives Your maidservants, but by force You have already taken Lakshmi, the wife of Narayana, from Vaikuntha and are carrying her around on Your chest. Out of shame she has assumed the form of a golden line on Your chest, and she takes her only pleasure there. Besides, within all the fourteen worlds and even above these worlds — in Vaikunthaloka, beyond this universe — You never reject any beautiful woman, no matter who she is or whom she belongs to. We know this quite well.'”

Text 40

Translation
Dear Krishna, what woman in all the three worlds wouldn't deviate from religious behavior when bewildered by the sweet, drawn-out melody of Your flute? Your beauty makes all three worlds auspicious. Indeed, even the cows, birds, trees and deer manifest the ecstatic symptom of bodily hair standing on end when they see Your beautiful form.

Text 41

Translation
Clearly You have taken birth in this world to relieve the fear and distress of the people of Vraja, just as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the primeval Lord, protects the domain of the demigods. Therefore, O friend of the distressed, kindly place Your lotus hand on Your maidservants' heads and burning breasts.

Text 42

Translation
Shukadeva Gosvami said: Smiling upon hearing these despondent words from the gopis, Lord Krishna, the supreme master of all masters of mystic yoga, mercifully enjoyed with them, although He is self-satisfied.

Text 43

Translation
Among the assembled gopis, the infallible Lord Krishna appeared just like the moon surrounded by stars. He whose activities are so magnanimous made their faces blossom with His affectionate glances, and His broad smiles revealed the effulgence of His jasmine-bud-like teeth.

Purport
The word acyuta here indicates that Lord Krishna did not fail to give pleasure to each and every gopi in the nocturnal assembly.

Text 44

Translation
As the gopis sang His praises, that leader of hundreds of women sang loudly in reply. He moved among them, wearing His Vaijayanti garland, beautifying the Vrndavana forest.

Purport
According to Shrila Jiva Gosvami, Lord Krishna sang many wonderful melodies and meters, and the gopis accompanied Him, following His lead. Krishna's singing on this occasion is described in the Shri Vishnu Purana:

Krishnah Sharac-candramasam
kaumudim kumudakaram
jagau gopi-janas tv ekam
Krishna-nama punah punah

“Krishna sang the glories of the autumn moon, the moonshine and the lotus-filled river, while the gopis simply sang His name repeatedly.”

Texts 45-46

Translation
Shri Krishna went with the gopis to the bank of the Yamuna, where the sand was cooling and the wind, enlivened by the river's waves, bore the fragrance of lotuses. There Krishna threw His arms around the gopis and embraced them. He aroused Cupid in the beautiful young ladies of Vraja by touching their hands, hair, thighs, belts and breasts, by playfully scratching them with His fingernails, and also by joking with them, glancing at them and laughing with them. In this way the Lord enjoyed His pastimes.

Text 47

Translation
The gopis became proud of themselves for having received such special attention from Krishna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and each of them thought herself the best woman on earth.

Purport
The gopis were proud because they had attained as their lover the greatest of all personalities. So in a sense they were proud of Krishna. Also, the pride of the gopis was a pretense created by Krishna's pastime potency in order to intensify their love for Him through separation. In this connection, Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti quotes Bharata Muni's NatyaShastra: na vina vipralambhena sambhogah pushtim aShnute. “Direct contact is not fully appreciated until separation has been experienced.”

Text 48

Translation
Lord KeShava, seeing the gopis too proud of their good fortune, wanted to relieve them of this pride and show them further mercy. Thus He immediately disappeared.

Purport
The word prasadaya here is significant. Lord Krishna was not going to neglect the gopis; rather, He would increase the power of their loving affairs by making another spectacular arrangement. After all, the gopis were basically proud of Krishna. He also made this arrangement, as we shall see, to show special favor to the beautiful young daughter of King Vrshabhanu.

Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada to the Tenth Canto, Twenty-ninth Chapter, of the Shrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Krishna and the Gopis Meet for the Rasa Dance.”