CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX
The Slaying of Arishta, the Bull Demon

This chapter describes how Krishna killed Arishtasura and how Kamsa reacted when he learned from Narada that Krishna and Balarama were the sons of Vasudeva.

The demon Arishta wanted to kill Krishna and Balarama, and thus he assumed the form of a huge bull with sharp horns. Everyone in Krishna's cowherd village became terrified when Arishtasura approached it, but the Lord pacified them, and when the bull demon charged Him He seized him by the horns and threw him about six yards. Though weakened, Arishta still wanted to attack Krishna. Thus, dripping with sweat, he charged the Lord once again. This time Krishna grabbed his horns, threw him to the ground and thrashed him like a pile of wet clothing. The demon vomited blood and gave up his life. Then Krishna and Rama, while being honored by the demigods and cowherd boys, returned to the village.

A short time later Narada Muni, the great sage among the demigods, came to see King Kamsa. He informed the King that Krishna and Balarama were not Nanda's sons but rather Vasudeva's. It was out of fear of Kamsa that Vasudeva had put the two boys under Nanda's care. Furthermore, said Narada, Kamsa would meet his death at Their hands.

Kamsa shook with fear and anger when he heard all this, and in great agitation he began thinking of how to destroy Krishna and Balarama. He called for the demons Canura and Mushtika and instructed them to kill the two brothers in a wrestling match. Then he spoke to Akrura, who was expert at executing his duties. Taking Akrura by the hand, Kamsa persuaded him to go to Vraja to bring the two boys to Mathura. Akrura agreed to carry out Kamsa's order and then returned home.

Text 1

Translation
Shukadeva Goswami said: The demon Arishta then came to the cowherd village. Appearing in the form of a bull with a large hump, he made the earth tremble as he tore it apart with his hooves.

Purport
According to the Shri Vishnu Purana, Arishtasura entered Krishna's village at twilight, as the Lord prepared to dance with the gopis:

prodoshardhe kadacit tu
rasasakte janardane
trasayan sa-mado goshtham
arishtah sampagatah

“Once, midway through the period of dusk, when Lord Janardana was eager to perform the rasa dance, Arishtasura madly entered the cowherd village, terrifying everyone.”

Text 2

Translation
Arishtasura bellowed very harshly and pawed the ground. With his tail raised and his eyes glaring, he began to tear up the embankments with the tips of his horns, every now and then passing a little stool and urine.

Texts 3-4

Translation
My dear King, clouds hovered about sharp-horned Arishtasura's hump, mistaking it for a mountain, and when the cowherd men and ladies caught sight of the demon, they were struck with terror. Indeed, the strident reverberation of his roar so frightened the pregnant cows and women that they lost their fetuses in miscarriages.

Purport
The Vedic literature categorizes miscarriages as follows: a-caturthad bhavet sravah patah pancama-shashthayoh/ ata urdhvam prasutih syat. “Up to the fourth month a premature delivery is called srava, in the fifth and sixth months it is called pata, and after this it is considered a birth (prasuti).”

Text 5

Translation
The domestic animals fled the pasture in fear, O King, and all the inhabitants rushed to Lord Govinda for shelter, crying, “Krishna, Krishna!”

Text 6

Translation
When the Supreme Lord saw the cowherd community distraught and fleeing in fear, He calmed them, saying, “Don't be afraid.” Then He called out to the bull demon as follows.

Text 7

Translation
You fool! What do you think you're doing, you wicked rascal, frightening the cowherd community and their animals when I am here just to punish corrupt miscreants like you!

Text 8

Translation
Having spoken these words, the infallible Lord Hari slapped His arms with His palms, further angering Arishta with the loud sound. The Lord then casually threw His mighty, serpentine arm over the shoulder of a friend and stood facing the demon.

Purport
Lord Krishna showed His contempt for the ignorant demon.

Text 9

Translation
Thus provoked, Arishta pawed the ground with one of his hooves and then, with the clouds hovering around his upraised tail, furiously charged Krishna.

Text 10

Translation
Pointing the tips of his horns straight ahead and glaring menacingly at Lord Krishna from the corners of his bloodshot eyes, Arishta rushed toward Him at full speed, like a thunderbolt hurled by Indra.

Text 11

Translation
The Supreme Lord Krishna seized Arishtasura by the horns and threw him back eighteen steps, just as an elephant might do when fighting a rival elephant.

Text 12

Translation
Thus repulsed by the Supreme Lord, the bull demon got up and, breathing hard and sweating all over his body, again charged Him in a mindless rage.

Text 13

Translation
As Arishta attacked, Lord Krishna seized him by the horns and knocked him to the ground with His foot. The Lord then thrashed him as if he were a wet cloth, and finally He yanked out one of the demon's horns and struck him with it until he lay prostrate.

Text 14

Translation
Vomiting blood and profusely excreting stool and urine, kicking his legs and rolling his eyes about, Arishtasura thus went painfully to the abode of Death. The demigods honored Lord Krishna by scattering flowers upon Him.

Text 15

Translation
Having thus killed the bull demon Arishta, He who is a festival for the gopis' eyes entered the cowherd village with Balarama.

Purport
This verse exemplifies the sublime contrast of spiritual qualities within Shri Krishna. In one four-line verse we simultaneously learn that Lord Krishna killed a powerful and wicked demon and that His boyish beauty gave festive pleasure to His young girlfriends. Lord Krishna is as hard as a thunderbolt or as soft as a rose, depending on our attitude toward Him. The demon Arishta wanted to kill Krishna and all His friends, so the Lord beat him into a wet rag and killed him. The gopis, however, loved Krishna, and thus the Lord boyishly reciprocated their conjugal feelings.

Text 16

Translation
After Arishtasura had been killed by Krishna, who acts wonderfully, Narada Muni went to speak to King Kamsa. That powerful sage of godly vision addressed the King as follows.

Purport
The term deva-darShana can be understood in many ways, all of which are consistent with the context and purport of this narration. Deva means “God,” and darShanah means “seeing” or “an audience with a great personality.” Thus deva-darShana, a name for Narada Muni, indicates that Narada has attained the perfection of seeing God, that getting Narada's audience is as good as getting God's (since Narada is a pure representative of the Lord), and also that Narada's audience is as good as that of the demigods, who are also known as devas. That there are all these meanings of the term deva-darShanah reveals something of the richness of the Shrimad-Bhagavatam's language.

From the Puranas, Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura has quoted twenty verses describing a joking conversation between Radha and Krishna that took place after Krishna had killed the demon Arishta. This conversation, so kindly quoted by the acarya, describes the origin of Radha-kunda and Shyama-kunda, Radha's and Krishna's bathing ponds. The verses are as follows:

masman sprShadya vrshabhardana hanta mugdha
ghoro 'suro 'yam ayi Krishna tad apy ayam gauh
vrtro yatha dvija ihasty ayi nishkrtih kim
Shudhyed bhavams tri-bhuvana-sthita-tirtha-krcchrat

“The innocent young gopis said, 'Ah, Krishna, don't touch us now, O killer of a bull! Alas, even though Arishta was a terrible demon, still he was a male cow, so You will have to undergo atonement, just as Lord Indra did after killing Vrtrasura. But how can You purify Yourself without going to the trouble of visiting every single holy place in the three worlds?'”

kim paryatami bhuvanany adhunaiva sarva
aniya tirtha-vitatih karavani tasu
snanam vilokayata tavad idam mukundah
procyaiva tatra krtavan bata parshni-ghatam

“[Krishna replied,] 'Why should I have to wander throughout the entire universe? I will at once bring all the countless pilgrimage places here and take My bath in them. Just watch!' With this, Lord Mukunda struck His heel on the ground.”

patalato jalam idam kila bhogavatya
ayatam atra nikhila api tirtha-sanghah
agacchateti bhagavad-vacasa ta etya
tatraiva rejur atha Krishna uvaca gopih

“[Then He said,] 'This is the water of the Bhogavati River, coming from the Patala region. And now, O holy places, all of you please come here!' When the Supreme Lord had spoken these words, all the holy places went there and appeared before Him. Krishna then addressed the gopis as follows.”

tirthani paShyata harer vacasa tavaivam
naiva pratima iti ta atha tirtha-varyah
procuh krtanjali-puta lavanabdhir asmi
kshirabdhir asmi Shrnutamara-dirghikasmi

“'See all the holy places!'

“But the gopis replied, 'We don't see them as You describe.'

“Then those best of holy places, joining their palms in supplication, spoke up:

“'I am the salt ocean.'

“'I am the Ocean of Milk.'

“'I am the Amara-dirghika.'”

Shono 'pi sindhur aham asmi bhavami tamra-
parni ca pushkaram aham ca sarasvati ca
godavari ravi-suta sarayuh prayago
revasmi paShyata jalam kuruta pratitim

“'I am the river Shona.'

“'I am the Sindhu.'

“'I am the Tamraparni.'

“'I am the holy place Pushkara.'

“'I am the river Sarasvati.'

“'And we are the Godavari, Yamuna and Reva rivers and the confluence of rivers at Prayaga. Just see our waters!'”

snatva tato harir ati-prajagalbha eva
Shuddhah saro 'py akaravam sthita-sarva-tirtham
yushmabhir atma-janushiha krto na dharmah
ko 'pi kshitav atha sakhir nijagada radha

“After purifying Himself by bathing, Lord Hari became quite arrogant and said, 'I have produced a pond containing all the various holy places, whereas you gopis must never have executed any religious duties on this earth for the pleasure of Lord Brahma.' Then Shrimati Radharani addressed Her girlfriends as follows.”

karyam mayapy ati-manohara-kundam ekam
tasmad yatadhvam iti tad-vacanena tabhih
Shri-Krishna-kunda-tata-paShcima-diShya-mando
gartah krto vrshabha-daitya-khurair vyaloki

“'I must create an even more beautiful pond. So go to work!' Having heard these words, the gopis saw that Arishtasura's hooves had dug a shallow ditch just west of Shri Krishna's pond.”

tatrardra-mrn-mrdula-gola-tatih prati-sva-
hastoddhrta anati-dura-gata vidhaya
divyam sarah prakatitam ghatika-dvayena
tabhir vilokya sarasam smarate sma Krishnah

“At that nearby spot, all the gopis began digging up lumps of soft mud with their hands, and in this way a divine pond manifested in the short span of an hour. Krishna was astonished to see the lake they produced.”

proce ca tirtha-salilaih paripurayaitan
mat-kundatah sarasijakshi sahalibhis tvam
radha tada na na na neti jagada yasmat
tvat-kunda-niram uru-go-vadha-patakaktam

“He said, 'Go ahead, lotus-eyed one. You and Your companions should fill this pond with water from Mine.'

“But Radha replied, 'No, no, no, no! This is impossible, since the water of Your pond is contaminated by Your terrible sin of killing a cow.'”

ahrtya punya-salilam Shata-koti-kumbhaih
sakhy-arbudena saha manasa-jahnavitah
etat sarah sva-madhuna paripurayami
tenaiva kirtim atulam tanavani loke

“'I will have My countless gopi companions bring the pure water of the Manasa-ganga here in billions of pots. In this way I will fill this lake with My own water and thus make its renown unequaled in the entire world.'”

krshnengitena sahasaitya samasta-tirtha-
sakhyas tadiya-saraso dhrta-divya-murtih
tushtava tatra vrshabhanu-sutam pranamya
bhaktya krtanjali-putah sravad-asra-dharah

“Lord Krishna then gestured to a heavenly personality who was an intimate associate of all the holy places. Suddenly that person rose up out of Krishna's pond and bowed down to the daughter of Shri Vrshabhanu [Radharani]. Then, with palms joined and tears pouring from his eyes, he began praying to Her in devotion.”

devi tvadiya-mahimanam avaiti sarva
Shastrartha-vin na ca vidhir na haro na lakshmih
kintv eka eva purushartha-Shiromanis tvat-
prasveda-marjana-parah svayam eva Krishnah

“'O goddess, even Lord Brahma himself, the knower of all scriptures, cannot understand Your glories, nor can Lord Shiva or Lakshmi. Only Krishna, the supreme goal of all human endeavor, can understand them, and thus He feels obliged to personally make sure that You can wash away Your perspiration when You are fatigued.'”

yaSh caru-yavaka-rasena bhavat-padabjam
arajya nupuram aho nidadhati nityam
prapya tvadiya-nayanabja-tata-prasadam
svam manyate parama-dhanyatamam prahrshyan

tasyajnayaiva sahasa vayam ajagama
tat-parshni-ghata-krta-kunda-vare vasamah
tvam cet prasidasi karoshi krpa-kataksham
tarhy eva tarsha-vitapi phalito bhaven nah

“'He is always anointing Your lotus feet with nectarean caru and yavaka and decorating them with ankle bells, and He rejoices and feels most fortunate simply by satisfying the tips of the toes of Your lotus feet. On His order we have immediately come here to live in this most excellent pond, which He created by one stroke of His heel. But only if You now feel satisfied with us and bestow upon us Your merciful glance will the tree of our desire bear fruit.'”

Shrutva stutim nikhila-tirtha-ganasya tushta
praha sma tarsham ayi vedayateti radha
yama tvadiya-sarasim sa-phala bhavama
ity eva no vara iti prakatam tadocuh

“Hearing this prayer spoken by the representative of the full assembly of holy places, Shri Radha was pleased and said, 'So, kindly tell Me your desire.'

“They then told Her plainly, 'Our lives would be successful if we could come to Your pond. That is the benediction we desire.'”

agacchateti vrshabhanu-suta smitasya
provaca kanta-vadanabja-dhrtakshi-kona
sakhyo 'pi tatra krta-sammatayah sukhabdhau
magna virejur akhila sthira-jangamaSh ca

“Glancing at Her beloved from the corners of Her eyes, the daughter of Vrshabhanu replied with a smile, 'Please come.' Her gopi companions all agreed with Her decision and became immersed in the ocean of happiness. Indeed, the beauty of all creatures, both mobile and stationary, was enhanced.”

prapya prasadam atha te vrshabhanujayah
Shri-Krishna-kunda-gata-tirtha-varah prasahya
bhittveva bhittim ati-vegata eva radha-
kundam vyadhuh sva-salilaih paripurnam eva

“Thus gaining the grace of Shrimati Radharani, the holy rivers and lakes in Shri Krishna-kunda forcibly broke through its boundary walls and swiftly filled Radha-kunda with their waters.”

proce harih priyatame tava kundam etan
mat-kundato 'pi mahimadhikam astu loke
atraiva me salila-kelir ihaiva nityam
snanam yatha tvam asi tadvad idam saro me

“Lord Hari then said, 'My dear Radha, may this pond of Yours become even more world-renowned than Mine. I will always come here to bathe and to enjoy My water pastimes. Indeed, this lake is as dear to Me as You are.'”

radhabravid aham api sva-sakhibhir etya
snasyamy arishta-Shata-mardanam astu tasya
yo 'rishta-mardana-sarasy uru-bhaktir atra
snayad vasen mama sa eva maha-priyo 'stu

“Radha replied, 'I will come to bathe in Your pond as well, even though You may kill hundreds of Arishta demons here. In the future, anyone who has intense devotion for this lake, which is on the spot where You chastised Arishtasura, and who bathes or resides here is sure to become very dear to Me.'”

rasotsavam prakurute sma ca tatra ratrau
Krishnambudah krta-maha-rasa-harsha-varshah
Shri-radhika-pravara-vidyud alankrta-Shris
trailokya-madhya-vitati-krta-divya-kirtih

“That night Lord Krishna initiated a rasa dance at Radha-kunda, generating a torrent of the greatest mood of splendorous pleasure. Shri Krishna resembled a cloud, and Shrimati Radharani a brilliant flash of lightning filling the sky with abundant beauty. In this way Their divine glories permeated the expanses of the three worlds.”

As a final note, it should be mentioned that Narada Muni, being a great sage, understood that the killing of Arishta more or less concluded the pastimes of Krishna in Vrndavana. Therefore Narada, anxious to facilitate the transferal of Krishna's pastimes to Mathura, approached Kamsa and addressed him as follows.

Text 17

Translation
[Narada told Kamsa:] YaShoda's child was actually a daughter, and Krishna is the son of Devaki. Also, Rama is the son of Rohini. Out of fear, Vasudeva entrusted Krishna and Balarama to his friend Nanda Maharaja, and it is these two boys who have killed your men.

Purport
Kamsa had been led to believe that Krishna was the son of YaShoda and that Devaki's eighth child had been a daughter. The identity of Devaki's eighth child was extremely important to Kamsa because a prophecy had foretold that her eighth child would kill him. Here Narada informs the King that the eighth child of Devaki was the formidable Krishna, thus implying that the prophecy should be taken very seriously. Having received this information, Kamsa obviously will now do everything in his power to kill Krishna and Balarama.

Text 18

Translation
Upon hearing this, the master of the Bhojas became furious and lost control of his senses. He picked up a sharp sword to kill Vasudeva.

Text 19

Translation
But Narada restrained Kamsa by reminding him that it was the two sons of Vasudeva who would cause his death. Kamsa then had Vasudeva and his wife shackled in iron chains.

Purport
Kamsa realized that there was no use in killing Vasudeva, since it was Vasudeva's sons, Krishna and Balarama, who were to kill him. According to the acaryas, Narada also advised Kamsa that if he killed Vasudeva the two young boys might flee and that it was therefore better not to kill him. Rather, Narada recommended, Kamsa should bring Krishna and Balarama to Kamsa's capital city, Mathura.

Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti points out that Narada did not act inimically toward the great devotees Vasudeva and Devaki when he revealed this information to Kamsa. In fact, as explained in the Eleventh Canto, Vasudeva was grateful to Narada because he was arranging for Kamsa's death at Krishna's hands, and further arranging for Krishna to come and live in Mathura, where His loving father could associate with Him.

Text 20

Translation
After Narada left, King Kamsa summoned KeShi and ordered him, “Go kill Rama and Krishna.”

Purport
Before having Krishna and Balarama brought to Mathura, Kamsa tried sending one more demon to Vrndavana.

Text 21

Translation
The King of the Bhojas next called for his ministers, headed by Mushtika, Canura, Shala and ToShala, and also for his elephant-keepers. The King addressed them as follows.

Texts 22-23

Translation
My dear heroic Canura and Mushtika, please hear this. Rama and Krishna, the sons of anakadundubhi [Vasudeva], are living in Nanda's cowherd village. It has been predicted that these two boys will be the cause of my death. When They are brought here, kill Them on the pretext of engaging Them in a wrestling match.

Text 24

Translation
Erect a wrestling ring with many surrounding viewing stands, and bring all the residents of the city and the outlying districts to see the open competition.

Purport
The word mancah refers to platforms constructed with large pillars. Kamsa wanted a festive atmosphere so that Krishna and Balarama would not be afraid to come.

Text 25

Translation
You, elephant-keeper, my good man, should position the elephant Kuvalayapida at the entrance to the wrestling arena and have him kill my two enemies.

Text 26

Translation
Commence the bow sacrifice on the CaturdaShi day in accordance with the relevant Vedic injunctions. In ritual slaughter offer the appropriate kinds of animals to the magnanimous Lord Shiva.

Text 27

Translation
Having thus commanded his ministers, Kamsa next called for Akrura, the most eminent of the Yadus. Kamsa knew the art of securing personal advantage, and thus he took Akrura's hand in his own and spoke to him as follows.

Text 28

Translation
My dear Akrura, most charitable one, please do me a friendly favor out of respect. Among the Bhojas and Vrshnis, there is no one else as kind to us as you.

Text 29

Translation
Gentle Akrura, you always carry out your duties soberly, and therefore I am depending on you, just as powerful Indra took shelter of Lord Vishnu to achieve his goals.

Text 30

Translation
Please go to Nanda's village, where the two sons of anakadundubhi are living, and without delay bring Them here on this chariot.

Purport
Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti gives the following interesting note: “When King Kamsa said 'with this chariot,' he pointed with his index finger to a brand-new, attractive chariot. Kamsa thought that since Akrura was innocent by nature, when he saw this fine, new vehicle he would naturally want to drive it and quickly bring the two boys back. But the actual reason Akrura went on a new chariot was that it would have been clearly inappropriate for the Supreme Personality of Godhead to mount a chariot that had already been enjoyed by the wicked Kamsa.”

Text 31

Translation
The demigods, who are under the protection of Vishnu, have sent these two boys as my death. Bring Them here, and also have Nanda and the other cowherd men come with gifts of tribute.

Text 32

Translation
After you bring Krishna and Balarama, I will have Them killed by my elephant, who is as powerful as death itself. And if by chance They escape from him, I will have Them killed by my wrestlers, who are as strong as lightning.

Text 33

Translation
When these two have been killed, I will kill Vasudeva and all Their lamenting relatives — the Vrshnis, Bhojas and DaSharhas.

Purport
Even today there are wicked political leaders throughout the world who make such plans and even carry them out.

Text 34

Translation
I will also kill my old father, Ugrasena, who is greedy for my kingdom, and I will kill his brother Devaka and all my other enemies as well.

Text 35

Translation
Then, my friend, this earth will be free of thorns.

Text 36

Translation
My elder relative Jarasandha and my dear friend Dvivida are solid well-wishers of mine, as are Shambara, Naraka and Bana. I will use them all to kill off those kings who are allied with the demigods, and then I will rule the earth.

Text 37

Translation
Now that you understand my intentions, please go at once and bring Krishna and Balarama to watch the bow sacrifice and see the opulence of the Yadus' capital.

Text 38

Translation
Shri Akrura said: O King, you have expertly devised a process to free yourself of misfortune. Still, one should be equal in success and failure, since it is certainly destiny that produces the results of one's work.

Text 39

Translation
An ordinary person is determined to act on his desires even when fate prevents their fulfillment. Therefore he encounters both happiness and distress. Yet even though such is the case, I will execute your order.

Purport
Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti explains that although what Akrura said was courteous and encouraging, his hidden meaning was far different. What he really meant was this: “Your plan is not fit to execute, yet I will carry it out since you are the King and I am your subject, and in any case, you are about to die.”

Text 40

Translation
Shukadeva Gosvami said: Having thus instructed Akrura, King Kamsa dismissed his ministers and retired to his quarters, and Akrura returned home.

Purport
Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada to the Tenth Canto, Thirty-sixth Chapter, of the Shrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Slaying of Arishta, the Bull Demon.”