CHAPTER ONE
The Curse upon the Yadu Dynasty

This chapter gives a hint of the destruction of the Yadu dynasty, which took place owing to the appearance of an iron club. Hearing this narration is a great impetus for becoming detached from the material world.

Lord Shri Krishna expertly arranged the great Kurukshetra battle between the Kurus and the Pandavas and thus removed to a great extent the earth's burden. But the Supreme Lord, whose influence is inconceivable, was not yet satisfied, because of the continued presence of the undefeatable Yadu family. The Lord desired to bring about the destruction of the Yadu dynasty so that He could completely wind up His pastimes on the earth and go back to His own abode. Using the pretense of a curse by an assembly of brahmanas, He withdrew His entire dynasty from the surface of the earth.

By Shri Krishna's desire, many great sages, headed by Narada and ViShvamitra, assembled at the holy place named Pindaraka, near the city of Dvaraka. The young boys of the Yadu family, absorbed in a playful mood, also arrived there. These boys dressed Samba in the guise of a pregnant woman about to give birth and inquired from the sages about the fruitfulness of Samba's so-called pregnancy. The sages cursed the mocking boys by saying, “She will give birth to a club that will destroy your family.” The Yadus, frightened by this curse, immediately lifted the garment from Samba's abdomen and found a club. Hurrying to the assembly of Ugrasena, the King of the Yadus, they offered a report of everything that had taken place. Fearing the brahmanas' curse, Yaduraja Ugrasena ordered the club ground to powder and thrown into the ocean. Within the ocean, a fish swallowed the last remaining lump of iron, and the waves carried all the bits of ground powder to the shore, where they were implanted and eventually grew into a grove of canes. Fishermen caught the fish, and a hunter named Jara used the iron lump found in its belly to fashion an arrow. Although the Supersoul, Lord Shri Krishna, understood what was happening, He did not wish to do anything to counteract it. Rather, in the form of time He sanctioned these events.

Text 1

Translation
Shri Shukadeva Gosvami said: Lord Shri Krishna, accompanied by Balarama and surrounded by the Yadu dynasty, executed the killing of many demons. Then, further to remove the burden of the earth, the Lord arranged for the great Battle of Kurukshetra, which suddenly erupted in violence between the Kurus and the Pandavas.

Purport
The Eleventh Canto of Shrimad-Bhagavatam begins with a reference to the pastimes executed by Lord Shri Krishna in the Tenth Canto. The beginning of the Tenth Canto describes that when the earth was overburdened by demoniac rulers, the personified earth, Bhumi, approached Lord Brahma with tears in her eyes, begging for relief, and Brahma immediately went with the demigods to approach the Supreme Lord in His form of KshirodakaShayi Vishnu. As the demigods waited respectfully on the shore of the Milk Ocean, the Supreme Lord announced through Brahma that He would soon incarnate on earth and that the demigods should also descend to assist in His pastimes. Thus from the very beginning of Lord Krishna's appearance it was understood that He would descend to the earth to remove the demons.

As Shrila Prabhupada states in his commentary to Bhagavad-gita (16.6), those who agree to obey the injunctions of revealed scriptures are known as demigods, whereas those who defy the orders of Vedic scriptures are known as asuras, or demons. The Vedic literatures are presented within the universe for the guidance of the conditioned souls, who are trapped under the three modes of material nature and who are therefore rotating in a continuous cycle of birth and death. By strictly adhering to the Vedic injunctions, we can easily satisfy our material needs and at the same time make tangible progress on the path back home, back to Godhead. Thus we can achieve an eternal life of bliss and knowledge in the Lord's own abode simply by obeying the Lord's instructions as they are presented in Vedic literatures such as Bhagavad-gita and Shrimad-Bhagavatam. The demons, however, minimize or even mock the absolute authority of the Supreme Lord and His teachings. Because these asuras envy the sovereign status of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they minimize the importance of the Vedic scriptures, which emanate directly from the breathing of the Lord. The demons establish a society governed by their own concocted whims and inevitably create chaos and misery, especially for pious living entities who sincerely desire to follow the will of God.

Lord Shri Krishna states in Bhagavad-gita that when there is a predominance of such chaotic, irreligious societies on the earth, He personally descends to rectify the imbalance. Thus from the very beginning of His transcendental infancy, Krishna systematically killed the powerful asuras, or demons, who were an intolerable burden for the earth. Lord Shri Krishna was assisted by His brother, Balarama, who is also the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although God is one, He can expand Himself to enjoy in many forms at once. That is His omnipotence. And the first such expansion is Balarama, or Baladeva. Balarama killed many noteworthy demons, including Dhenukasura, Dvivida and the envious Rukmi. Krishna was also accompanied by the members of the Yadu dynasty, many of whom were demigods who had descended to assist the Lord.

Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati thakura, however, has revealed that although many demigods had taken birth in the Yadu dynasty to assist the Lord, some members of the Yadu dynasty were actually inimical toward Krishna. Because of their mundane vision of the Lord, they considered themselves to be on the same level as Krishna. Having taken birth in the family of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, they had inconceivable strength, and thus they misunderstood Krishna's supreme position. Having forgotten that Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they would constitute a great burden, and consequently it was necessary for Krishna to remove them from the earth. There is a popular saying that familiarity breeds contempt. To destroy the contemptuous members of His own dynasty, the Lord caused a quarrel among them. For this purpose, He arranged for Narada and other sages to display anger against the Karshnas, the members of His family. Although many Yadus who were devoted to Krishna were apparently killed in this fratricidal war, Lord Krishna actually returned them to their original positions as universal directors, or demigods. It is the Lord's promise in Bhagavad-gita that He will always protect those who are favorable to His service.

Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura, in his commentary on this verse, has given a summary of the entire Eleventh Canto as follows. Chapter One describes the beginning of the maushala-lila, or the prelude to the destruction of the Yadu dynasty. Chapters Two through Five describe the conversations between the nine Yogendras and King Nimi. Chapter Six describes the prayers of Brahma, Shiva and other residents of heaven. Chapters Seven through Twenty-nine present the conversation between Krishna and Uddhava that is known as the Uddhava-gita. Chapter Thirty describes the withdrawal of the Yadu dynasty from the earth. The final chapter describes the disappearance of Lord Krishna.

Text 2

Translation
Because the sons of Pandu were enraged by the numerous offenses of their enemies, such as duplicitous gambling, verbal insults, the seizing of Draupadi's hair, and many other cruel transgressions, the Supreme Lord engaged those Pandavas as the immediate cause to execute His will. On the pretext of the Battle of Kurukshetra, Lord Krishna arranged for all the kings who were burdening the earth to assemble with their armies on opposite sides of the battlefield, and when the Lord killed them through the agency of war, the earth was relieved of its burden.

Purport
The Pandavas were repeatedly harassed by their enemies, such as Duryodhana and DuhShasana. As innocent young princes, the Pandavas had no enemy, but Duryodhana was constantly plotting against his helpless cousins. The Pandavas were sent to a house of lac, which was later burned to the ground. They were administered poison, and their chaste wife Draupadi was publicly insulted when her hair was pulled and an attempt was made to strip her naked. Throughout these dangers, Lord Shri Krishna constantly protected the Pandavas, who were fully surrendered to Him and who knew no shelter other than Him.

In this verse the word itaretaratah is significant. Previous to the Battle of Kurukshetra, Krishna had personally killed many demons, including Putana, KeShi, Aghasura and Kamsa. Now, Krishna wanted to complete His mission of removing the earth's burden by killing the remaining impious persons. But as stated here, krtva nimittam: the Lord did not personally kill, but empowered His devotees Arjuna and the other Pandavas to remove the impious kings. Thus acting personally and through His immediate expansion Balarama, as well as by empowering His pure devotees such as the Pandavas, Krishna fully displayed the pastimes of the yugavatara by reestablishing religious principles and ridding the world of demons. Although the general purpose of the Kurukshetra battle was to kill the demons, by Krishna's arrangement some great devotees such as Bhishma also appeared to be inimical toward the Lord. But as described in the First Canto of Shrimad-Bhagavatam (1.9.39) by the words hata gatah svarupam, many great devotees played with the Lord as enemies and upon being killed by Krishna returned immediately to His abode in the spiritual sky in their original spiritual bodies. Because God is absolute, by His killing He simultaneously removes the demons from the earth and encourages His pure devotees.

Text 3

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead used the Yadu dynasty, which was protected by His own arms, to eliminate the kings who with their armies had been the burden of this earth. Then the unfathomable Lord thought to Himself, “Although some may say that the earth's burden is now gone, in My opinion it is not yet gone, because there still remains the Yadava dynasty itself, whose strength is unbearable for the earth.”

Purport
Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati thakura has remarked in this regard that although ordinary people might think that the Lord had now removed the burden of the earth by killing the demons, reestablishing dharma, and so on, Lord Shri Krishna Himself could detect that there was further danger from the irreligious activities of His own family members who were acting improperly. It is stated in Shrimad-Bhagavatam that a just king will refuse to punish his own enemy if his enemy is innocent but will punish his own son if his son actually deserves punishment. Thus although in the eyes of the world the members of the Lord's own dynasty are always worshipable, Lord Krishna detected that by their intimate association with Him some members of the Yadu dynasty had become indifferent to His will. Since such whimsical members of the Yadu dynasty could act freely, being relatives of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they would surely cause great misfortune for the world, and foolish persons would take such whimsical behavior to be the will of Krishna. Thus the Lord, whose desires are inconceivable, began to consider the need to annihilate the indifferent, contemptuous members of the Yadu family.

From the viewpoint of ordinary persons, all the demons had been killed by the Supreme Lord's pastimes in Dvaraka and Mathura, as well as by the Battle of Kurukshetra, and the earth was now free of its burden. Nevertheless, to free the earth from the remaining burden of His own puffed-up family members, Lord Shri Krishna transferred them away from the earth by causing a fratricidal quarrel among them. In this way He prepared for His own disappearance from the earth.

Shridhara Svami has pointed out that the word bahubhih, “by His arms,” is used in the plural (rather than the dual) to indicate that the Lord caused the destruction of the Yadu dynasty in His four-armed form. The original form of Krishna as Govinda is two-armed, but it was by the plenary portion of the four-armed Narayana that the Lord killed all the demons on the earth and ultimately removed the burdensome members of His own family. It may be asked, If certain members of the Yadu family had become indifferent to the will of the Lord, why didn't they oppose the Lord in His plan to remove them from the earth? Therefore the word aprameyah is used, which indicates that it is impossible for anyone, even the Lord's own family members, to understand His will completely.

Shrila Jiva Gosvami has given another reason for the destruction of the Yadu dynasty. He emphasizes that the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead should never be taken to be ordinary material activities. Nor are the Lord's associates ordinary persons. Although Lord Krishna apparently incarnates within this world for some time and then goes away, it should be understood that the Supreme Lord is eternally situated with His entourage in His various abodes in the spiritual sky, such as Shri Gokula, Mathura and Dvaraka. The members of the Yadu dynasty are eternal associates of the Lord, and therefore they cannot bear to be separated from the Lord. Since Krishna was preparing to give up His earthly pastimes, if He were to leave the Yadu dynasty on the earth they would surely become so disturbed by His absence that in their highly agitated state of mind they would trample and destroy the earth. Therefore, Krishna arranged the disappearance of the Yadu dynasty prior to His own disappearance.

Shrila Jiva Gosvami concludes that ultimately the members of the Yadu dynasty are never to be considered irreligious. Vaishnava acaryas have mentioned that the story of the disappearance of the Yadu dynasty is especially meant to help the conditioned souls achieve liberation from the bondage of materialistic life. Within the three worlds there were none as powerful and opulent as the Yadu dynasty. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the possessor of unlimited opulences — beauty, strength, knowledge, fame and so on — and the members of the Yadu dynasty, being the personal associates of the Lord, were also endowed with inconceivable opulences. Therefore, when we see how a fratricidal war suddenly deprived the members of the Yadu dynasty of all of their earthly possessions and even their lives, we can understand that there is no permanent position within this material world. In other words, although the members of the Yadu dynasty are eternal associates of the Lord and were immediately transferred to another planet where the Lord was appearing, their sudden disappearance through fratricidal war is meant to impress upon the conditioned souls the temporary nature of this world. Therefore, the apparent indifference or enmity of certain members of the Yadu dynasty toward Krishna should not be taken to be actual irreligion on their part. The entire situation was arranged by Lord Krishna to teach a lesson to the conditioned souls. In this connection Shrila Jiva Gosvami has cited several verses from the Bhagavatam to prove that the members of the Yadu dynasty achieved their exalted birth in the Lord's own family by innumerable pious activities and by complete absorption in thought of Lord Krishna. In fact it is said that in sleeping, sitting, walking and speaking, they were unable to remember their own selves, because they were simply thinking of Krishna.

In the First Canto of Shrimad-Bhagavatam (1.15.33), Shrila Prabhupada has commented as follows on the disappearance of the Yadu dynasty: “The setting of the sun does not mean the end of the sun. It means that the sun is out of our sight. Similarly, the end of the mission of the Lord on a particular planet or universe only means that He is out of our sight. The end of the Yadu dynasty also does not mean that it is annihilated. It disappears along with the Lord, out of our sight.”

Text 4

Translation
Lord Krishna thought, “No outside force could ever bring about the defeat of this family, the Yadu dynasty, whose members have always been fully surrendered to Me and are unrestricted in their opulence. But if I inspire a quarrel within the dynasty, that quarrel will act just like a fire created from the friction of bamboo in a grove, and then I shall achieve My real purpose and return to My eternal abode.”

Purport
Even though Lord Krishna wanted to arrange for the disappearance of the members of the Yadu dynasty, He could not personally kill them, as He had killed many demons, because the Yadu dynasty was His own family. One might ask why Lord Krishna did not arrange for them to be killed by others. Therefore it is stated in this verse, naivanyatah paribhavo 'sya bhavet kathancit: because the Yadu dynasty was the Lord's own family, no one within the universe was capable of killing them, not even the demigods. In fact, ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura points out that no one within the universe was capable of even insulting the members of the Yadu dynasty, what to speak of defeating or killing them. The reason is given here by the words mat-samShrayasya. The members of the Yadu dynasty had fully taken shelter of Krishna, and therefore they were always under the personal protection of the Lord. It is stated, mare Krishna rakhe ke, rakhe Krishna mare ke: If Krishna protects someone, no one can kill him, and if Krishna wants to kill someone, no one can save him. Krishna had originally requested all of His associates, along with the demigods, to appear on the earth to assist Him in His pastimes. Now that His pastimes were coming to an end on this particular planet and would be transferred to another planet in another universe, Krishna wanted to remove all of His associates from the earth so that in His absence they would not constitute a burden. Since the powerful Yadu dynasty, being the Lord's personal family and army, could not possibly be defeated by anyone, Krishna arranged an internal quarrel, just as the wind in a bamboo forest sometimes rubs the bamboos together and creates a fire that consumes the entire forest.

Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati has pointed out that ordinary people, hearing of the adventures of the Yadu family, might think that the heroes of the Yadu dynasty are as worshipable as Krishna or that they are independent controllers. In other words, people polluted by Mayavada philosophy might see the Yadu dynasty as being on the same level as Krishna. Therefore, to establish that even the most powerful living entity can never equal or surpass the Supreme Lord, Krishna arranged for the destruction of the Yadu dynasty.

Text 5

Translation
My dear King Parikshit, when the supreme almighty Lord, whose desire always comes to pass, had thus made up His mind, He withdrew His own family on the pretext of a curse spoken by an assembly of brahmanas.

Purport
Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati thakura has made a very important comment on this verse. He states that since the intentions of the Supreme Lord, Krishnacandra, are always perfect, it was certainly in consideration of the greatest benefit for the entire world that He destroyed His own family on the pretext of a curse by brahmanas. In this connection, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati thakura has shown a parallel in the pastimes of Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is Krishna Himself appearing as His own devotee.

Lord Caitanya appeared along with His first plenary expansion, known as Lord Nityananda Prabhu, and with Lord Advaita Prabhu. All three personalities — Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu and Advaita Prabhu — are accepted by Vaishnava acaryas to be in the category of vishnu-tattva, the full status of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. These three Personalities of Godhead perceived that in the future Their so-called seminal descendants would get undue recognition and thus, being puffed up, would commit grave offenses against those who were actually Vaishnava gurus or representatives of the Lord.

Every living being is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, as stated in the Bhagavad-gita (mamaivamShah). Every living entity is originally a son of God, yet to execute His pastimes the Lord selects certain highly qualified living entities whom He allows to take birth as His personal relatives. But those living entities who appear as descendants of the Lord's personal family may undoubtedly become proud of such a position and thus abuse the great adulation they receive from ordinary people. In this way such persons may artificially get undue attention and divert people from the actual principle of spiritual advancement, which is to surrender to the pure devotee who represents the Lord. The last eight verses of the Twelfth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita give a description of the pure devotees the Lord permits to act as acaryas, or spiritual leaders of mankind. In other words, simply to take birth in the personal family of Krishna is not the qualification for being a spiritual master, since according to Bhagavad-gita, pitaham asya jagatah: every living entity is eternally a member of the Lord's family. Krishna says in Bhagavad-gita, samo 'ham sarva-bhuteshu na me dveshyo 'sti na priyah: “I am equal to everyone. No one is My enemy, and no one is My special friend.” If the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears to have a special family, such as the Yadu dynasty, such a so-called family is a special arrangement of the Lord's pastimes in order to attract the conditioned souls. When Krishna descends, He acts as if He were an ordinary person in order to attract the living entities to His pastimes. Therefore Krishna acted as though the Yadu dynasty was His personal family, although in fact every living entity is a member of His family.

Ordinary people, however, not understanding the higher principles of spiritual knowledge, easily forget the actual qualifications of a bona fide spiritual master and instead give undue importance to people born in the Lord's so-called family. Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, therefore, avoided this impediment on the path of spiritual enlightenment by leaving behind no children. Although Caitanya Mahaprabhu married twice, He was childless. Nityananda Prabhu, who is also the Supreme Personality of Godhead, did not accept any of the natural sons born of His own son, Shri Virabhadra. Similarly, Lord Advaita acarya divested of His association all of His sons except Acyutananda and two others. Acyutananda, the chief faithful son of Advaita acarya, had no seminal progeny, and the remaining three of the six sons of Lord Advaita fell from the path of devotion to the Lord and are known as rejected sons. In other words, the appearance of Caitanya Mahaprabhu allowed little facility for continuing a so-called seminal family to create confusion. The respect shown to the conception of seminal lineage in deference to the ideas of the smartas is unfit to be accepted by one who actually understands the supreme truth from Vedic authority.

Other acaryas, or spiritual masters, have also demonstrated this point in their own families. His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, our own beloved spiritual master, who is the mighty author of this Shrimad-Bhagavatam series, was born in a family of pure devotees, and he himself exhibited all the symptoms of pure devotional service from his very childhood. Shrila Prabhupada eventually came to the Western countries and exhibited unprecedented spiritual potency in establishing the Krishna consciousness movement all over the world. In a few short years, he translated more than fifty large volumes of Vedic philosophy. By his practical activities he is certainly understood to be a most empowered representative of the Lord. Nonetheless, his own family members, although devotees of Krishna, did not at all come up to the proper standard of devotional service and are therefore not given attention by the members of ISKCON. The natural tendency for the members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness would be to offer all reverence and worship to the members of Shrila Prabhupada's immediate family. But since by Krishna's arrangement these family members are not at all on the platform of pure devotional service, the members of ISKCON give them hardly any attention but instead worship those who actually exhibit the qualities of highly advanced Vaishnavas, regardless of their so-called birth. In other words, birth cannot constitute the qualification for a respectable person, even when one is born in the Lord's own family or in the acarya's family, what to speak of an ordinary wealthy or learned family.

In India there is a class of men known as nityananda-vamSha, who claim to be direct descendants of Lord Nityananda and therefore worthy of the highest respect for their position in devotional service. In this regard, Shrila Prabhupada has written in The Nectar of Devotion, “In the Middle Ages, after the disappearance of Lord Caitanya's great associate Lord Nityananda, a class of priestly persons claimed to be the descendants of Nityananda, calling themselves the gosvami caste. They further claimed that the practice and spreading of devotional service belonged only to their particular class, which was known as nityananda-vamSha. In this way they exercised their artificial power for some time, until Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati thakura, the powerful acarya of the Gaudiya Vaishnava sampradaya, completely smashed their idea. There was a great hard struggle for some time, but it has turned out successful, and it is now correctly and practically established that devotional service is not restricted to a particular class of men. Besides that, anyone who is engaged in devotional service is already a high-class brahmana. So Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati thakura's struggle for this movement has come out successful. It is on the basis of his position that anyone, from any part of the universe, can become a Gaudiya Vaishnava.”

In other words, the essence of spiritual knowledge is that every living being, regardless of his present status in life, is originally a servant of the Supreme Lord, and it is the mission of the Lord to reclaim all of these fallen living entities. Despite his past situation, any living being who is willing to surrender again at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord or His bona fide representative can purify himself by strictly adhering to the rules and regulations of bhakti-yoga and thus act as a high-class brahmana. Nonetheless, the seminal descendants of the Lord think themselves to have acquired their ancestor's character and position. Thus the Supreme Lord, who is the well-wisher of the entire universe and especially of His devotees, bewilders the discriminatory power of His own descendants in such a contradictory way that these seminal descendants become recognized as deviant and the actual qualification to be a representative of the Lord, namely unalloyed surrender to the will of Krishna, remains prominent.

Texts 6-7

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna, is the reservoir of all beauty. All beautiful things emanate from Him, and His personal form is so attractive that it steals the eyes away from all other objects, which then seem devoid of beauty in comparison to Him. When Lord Krishna was on the earth, He attracted the eyes of all people. When Krishna spoke, His words attracted the minds of all who remembered them. By seeing the footsteps of Lord Krishna, people became attracted to Him, and thus they wanted to offer their bodily activities to the Lord as His followers. In this way Krishna very easily spread His glories, which are sung throughout the world by the most sublime and essential Vedic verses. Lord Krishna considered that simply by hearing and chanting those glories, conditioned souls born in the future would cross beyond the darkness of ignorance. Being satisfied with this arrangement, He left for His desired destination.

Purport
According to Shridhara Svami, these two verses indicate that Lord Krishna, having achieved all the purposes for which He had descended, went back to His spiritual kingdom. It is natural that people in the material world hanker to see a beautiful object. In materialistic life, however, our consciousness is polluted by the influence of the three modes of nature, and therefore we hanker for material objects of beauty and pleasure. The materialistic process of sense gratification is imperfect, because the laws of material nature will not allow us to be happy or satisfied in materialistic life. The living entity is constitutionally an eternal servant of God and is meant to appreciate the infinite beauty and pleasure of the Supreme Lord. Lord Krishna is the Absolute Truth and the reservoir of all beauty and pleasure. By serving Krishna we can also share in His ocean of beauty and pleasure, and thus our desire to see beautiful things and enjoy life will be fully satisfied. The example is given that the hand cannot enjoy food independently but can assimilate it indirectly by giving it to the stomach. Similarly, by serving Lord Krishna the living entity, who is part and parcel of the Lord, will derive unlimited happiness.

The inconceivable Supreme Lord, Shri Krishna, by displaying His own true form, freed the living entities from falsely seeking forms of beauty other than His form, which is itself the source of all beautiful things. Simply by seeing His lotus feet, fortunate living beings could distinguish between the ungodly endeavors of the karmis, who seek gross enjoyment for their own sense gratification, and the practice of dovetailing one's activities with the service of the Lord. Although philosophers perpetually speculate about the nature of God, Lord Krishna directly liberated the jiva souls from all speculative misunderstandings about Him by displaying His actual transcendental form and activities. Superficially, Krishna's personal form, words and activities resemble those of ordinary conditioned souls. Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati thakura explains that this apparent resemblance between the Lord's activities and those of the living entities is a merciful concession by the Lord so that the conditioned souls will be attracted to Him and become eligible to return to His kingdom for an eternal life of bliss and knowledge. By showing His own spiritual form and kingdom to the living entities in a way tangible for them, Lord Krishna drove away their false enjoying attitude and removed their long-standing indifference to His personality. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, if one can understand the position of Shri Krishna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one will never again fall into the network of material illusion. Such a falldown can be avoided if one constantly hears about the unique transcendental form and beauty of the Lord from authorized Vedic literatures.

As explained in Bhagavad-gita (2.42-43):

yam imam pushpitam vacam
pravadanty avipaShcitah
veda-vada-ratah partha
nanyad astiti vadinah

kamatmanah svarga-para
janma-karma-phala-pradam
kriya-viShesha-bahulam
bhogaiShvarya-gatim prati

“Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of the Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to heavenly planets, resultant good birth, power, and so forth. Being desirous of sense gratification and opulent life, they say that there is nothing more than this.”

On the other hand, certain parts of Vedic literature are specifically meant to award material sense gratification to the conditioned soul and at the same time gradually condition him to obey the Vedic injunctions. The portions of the Vedas that recommend fruitive activities for regulated sense gratification are themselves dangerous, because the living being who engages in such activities becomes easily entangled in the material enjoyment offered and neglects the ultimate purpose of the Vedas. The ultimate purpose of Vedic literature is to bring the living entity back to his original consciousness, in which he acts as an eternal servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By rendering service to the Lord, the living entity can enjoy unlimited spiritual bliss in the association of the Lord in His own kingdom. Thus, one who seriously desires to advance in Krishna consciousness should specifically hear the Vedic literature that deals with pure devotional service to the Lord. One should hear from those who are highly advanced in Krishna consciousness and avoid interpretations that stimulate materialistic desires for enjoyment.

When the tiny living entity is finally able to see the difference between the temporary affairs of this world and the transcendental activities of Lord Trivikrama, Krishna, he devotes himself to the Lord and removes from his heart the dark covering of matter, no longer desiring sense gratification, which is enjoyed under the two headings sin and piety. In other words, although people within this world are considered sinful or pious, on the material platform both sin and piety are performed for one's personal gratification. If one can understand that his real happiness lies in giving pleasure to Krishna, Lord Krishna takes such a fortunate living being back to His own abode, which is called Goloka Vrndavana. According to Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati thakura, the Lord first gives a sincere soul the opportunity to hear about His pastimes. When the devotee has advanced in his spontaneous attraction to such narrations, the Lord gives him the opportunity to take part in His spiritual pastimes as they appear within this world. By taking part in the pastimes of the Lord within a particular universe, the living being becomes completely detached from the material world, and ultimately the Lord brings him to His personal abode in the spiritual sky.

Foolish people cannot understand this substantial benefit offered by the Lord, but Lord Krishna acts for the benefit of such foolish people by saving them from their absorption in the temporary world of false enjoyment. The Lord does this by personally displaying His own superlative transcendental beauty, transcendental words and transcendental activities. Shrila Jiva Gosvami has pointed out that the words tamo 'naya tarishyanti indicate that although Lord Krishna appeared five thousand years ago, one who hears and chants about the activities, form and words of the Lord will get exactly the same benefit as those who personally experienced these things as contemporaries of Lord Krishna. In other words, he will also cross over the darkness of material existence and achieve the Lord's abode. Thus Shrila Jiva Gosvami concludes that if such an exalted destination is available to all living beings, it must certainly have been awarded to the Yadavas, who were personal associates of the Lord.

It is stated in this verse that by His beauty Krishna stole away the vision of people who saw Him. Krishna's speaking was so attractive that those who heard Him became speechless. Since generally those who cannot speak are also deaf, the Lord's words also stole away the ears of those who heard Him, since they were no longer interested in hearing sounds other than the Lord's speaking. By displaying the beauty of His footsteps, Krishna stole away from those who saw them the power to perform materialistic activities. Thus by His appearance in this world Krishna took away the senses of mankind. In other words, He made people blind, dumb, deaf, mad and otherwise invalid. Therefore ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura asks, “Since He took away everything people possessed, who would properly call Him merciful? Rather, He is just a thief.” In this way, he indirectly offers the highest praise to the beauty of the Lord. ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura also points out that although Krishna gave liberation to the demons by destroying them, to those who were attracted to Him, Krishna gave pure love of God and drowned them in the ocean of His own beauty. Thus Krishna is not like a person who gives charity without discrimination. And Krishna is so merciful that not only did He give the highest benediction to the inhabitants of the earth, but He empowered great saintly persons such as Vyasadeva to describe His pastimes with beautiful poetic verses. Thus people born on the earth in the future could easily cross over the ocean of birth and death by those glories, which are compared to a strong boat. In fact, those of us who are now enjoying the glories of Krishna through the transparent medium of the Bhaktivedanta purports to Shrimad-Bhagavatam, by the mercy of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, are the fortunate recipients of the mercy of Krishna, who was merciful even to persons yet to be born.

Quoting from the Amara-koSha dictionary, Shrila ViShvanatha Cakravarti has also stated, padam vyavasita-trana-sthana-lakshmy-anghri-vastushu: the possible definitions for padam are “that which has been decided,” “place of deliverance,” “fortune,” “foot” or “object.” Thus he translates the word padam as also meaning vyavasita, “that which has been decided.” In other words, the statement agat svam padam iShvarah indicates not only that Krishna went to His abode, but that Krishna realized His determined desire. If we say that Krishna returned to His eternal abode, we imply that Krishna had been absent from His abode and was now returning. Therefore, ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura points out that it is incorrect to say in a normal sense that Krishna “went back to His abode.” According to the Brahma-samhita, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna, is always present in His eternal abode in the spiritual sky. Yet by His causeless mercy He also manifests Himself from time to time within the material world. In other words, God is all-pervading. Even when present before us He is simultaneously in His abode. The ordinary soul, or jiva, is not all-pervading like the Supersoul, and therefore by his presence in the material world he is absent from the spiritual world. In fact, we are suffering due to that absence from the spiritual world, or Vaikuntha. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, is all-pervading, and therefore ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura translates the words agat svam padam to mean that Krishna achieved exactly what He desired. The Lord is all-pervading and self-sufficient in fulfilling His perfect desires. His appearance and disappearance in this world should never be compared to ordinary material activities.

ViShvanatha Cakravarti has quoted a statement by Uddhava at the beginning of the Third Canto of Shrimad-Bhagavatam (3.2.7) wherein Uddhava compares the disappearance of Lord Krishna to the setting of the sun. In his purport to this verse, Shrila Prabhupada has written: “The comparison of Krishna to the sun is very appropriate. As soon as the sun sets, darkness automatically appears. But the darkness experienced by the common man does not affect the sun itself either at the time of sunrise or at sunset. Lord Krishna's appearance and disappearance are exactly like that of the sun. He appears and disappears in innumerable universes, and as long as He is present in a particular universe there is all transcendental light in that universe, but the universe from which He passes away is put into darkness. His pastimes, however, are everlasting. The Lord is always present in some universe, just as the sun is present in either the Eastern or Western Hemisphere. The sun is always present either in India or America, but when the sun is present in India the American land is in darkness, and when the sun is present in America the Indian hemisphere is in darkness.”

Shrila Jiva Gosvami has quoted a verse from the end of the Eleventh Canto that further clarifies that the abode of the Lord is as eternal as the Lord Himself: “The ocean immediately swallowed Dvaraka, O Maharaja, taking away the Lord's personal abode, which the Lord had abandoned. The Supreme Lord, Madhusudana, is always present in Dvaraka, which merely by being remembered takes away everything unfavorable. It is the most auspicious of auspicious places.” (Bhag. 11.31.23-24) Just as the sun appears to be swallowed by the night, Krishna or His abode or His dynasty seems to disappear, but actually the Lord and all of His paraphernalia, including His abode and dynasty, are eternal, in the same way as the sun is always in the sky. Shrila Prabhupada says in this connection, “As the sun appears in the morning and gradually rises to the meridian and then again sets in one hemisphere while simultaneously rising in the other, so Lord Krishna's disappearance in one universe and the beginning of His different pastimes in another take place simultaneously. As soon as one pastime is finished here, it is manifested in another universe. And thus His nitya-lila, or eternal pastimes, are going on without ending.”

Text 8

Translation
King Parikshit inquired: How could the brahmanas curse the Vrshnis, who were always respectful to the brahmanas, charitable, and inclined to serve senior and exalted personalities and whose minds were always fully absorbed in thought of Lord Krishna?

Purport
Brahmanas generally become angry at persons who disrespect the brahminical class, who are uncharitable and who decline to serve senior, respectable personalities. The Vrshnis, however, were not like that, and thus they are described here by King Parikshit as brahmanyanam, or sincere followers of brahminical culture. Further, even if the brahmanas became angry, why would they curse members of Krishna's own family? Since the brahmanas were well learned, they must have known that it is offensive to oppose personal associates of the Supreme Lord. The Yadu dynasty is specifically described here as vrshninam and Krishna-cetasam. In other words, they were Lord Krishna's own men, and they were always absorbed in thinking of Krishna. Therefore, even if somehow or other the brahmanas had cursed them, how could that curse have had any effect? These are the questions of Parikshit Maharaja.

Although the Vrshnis are described in this verse as Krishna-cetasam, always absorbed in thinking of Krishna, it is clearly indicated that Krishna desired that the brahmanas become angry and curse the Yadu dynasty. The Supreme Lord desired to remove His personal dynasty from the earth, and therefore uncustomary offensive behavior was exhibited by the young boys of Krishna's own family.

It is to be understood from this incident that when a man displays envy and ridicule of devotees of Vishnu, his brahmanyata, or high spiritual qualifications, along with his reverence for Shri Krishna, are all destroyed. Contempt and ridicule directed toward respectable persons and true brahmanas vanquish all good qualities. If there is a break in etiquette toward His devotees, the Supreme Lord will become ill-disposed even to His own relatives and friends and thus arrange to destroy those who oppose His devotees. If foolish persons in the guise of members of Krishna's personal family express enmity toward Vaishnavas, such offenders cannot properly be called offspring of Lord Krishna's dynasty. That is the supreme equality of the Personality of Godhead.

Text 9

Translation
King Parikshit continued inquiring: What was the motive for this curse? What did it consist of, O purest of the twice-born? And how could such a disagreement have arisen among the Yadus, who all shared the same goal of life? Please tell me all these things.

Purport
Ekatmanam means that the Yadus all shared the same opinion, namely that Krishna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was the goal of their life. Therefore, Parikshit Maharaja could not see any obvious reason for such a destructive quarrel among the members of the Yadu dynasty, and he was anxious to know the actual cause.

Text 10

Translation
Shukadeva Gosvami said: The Lord, who bore His body as the amalgamation of everything beautiful, dutifully executed the most auspicious activities while on the earth, although He was, in fact, without any endeavor already satisfied in all desires. Residing in His abode and enjoying life, the Lord, whose glorification is in itself magnanimous, now wanted to annihilate His dynasty, as there still remained some small part of His duty to be carried out.

Purport
This verse answers Parikshit Maharaja's question as to how the powerful members of the Yadu dynasty could be cursed by the brahmanas and thus destroy themselves in a fratricidal war. By the words samhartum aicchata kulam it is clearly stated that Lord Krishna Himself desired to withdraw His dynasty and therefore engaged the brahmanas as His agent. ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura remarks here that Krishna had clearly demonstrated the insurpassable beauty and strength of His personal form, pastimes and pleasures to all the residents of the earth. Thus His incarnation to kill the demons, save the devotees and reestablish religious principles had been completely successful. When Lord Krishna noticed that His mission was now complete, everything having been done perfectly, He desired to return to His transcendental abode, along with the Vrshnis. Thus the Lord personally arranged for the Yadu dynasty to be cursed by the brahmanas.

According to ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura, apta-kamah means that Krishna is always self-satisfied, and yet in order to execute His transcendental pastimes He arranged to destroy His own dynasty for three specific purposes, namely, to reestablish in the heavenly planets those demigods who had taken birth among the Yadus to assist Him, to reestablish His plenary Vishnu expansions in Their abodes, such as Vaikuntha, Shvetadvipa and BadarikaShrama, and to remove Himself from the vision of the material world, along with His eternal associates.

In this connection, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati has made several important remarks about the destruction of the Yadu dynasty. He states that many so-called religious persons have fallen down by committing the second offense against chanting the holy name, namely vishnau sarveShvareShe tad-itara-sama-dhih, considering another living entity to be equal to Lord Vishnu, who is the Lord of lords. One who is captured by the impersonal tendency of Mayavada philosophy falsely thinks that the external, material energy of the Lord is equal to His internal, spiritual potency. In this way, one equates ordinary living entities with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, taking Krishna to be another aspect of maya. This is a most unfortunate misconception, for it spoils one's opportunity to understand God as He actually is.

Persons inclined toward this illusory conception of life would undoubtedly consider the members of the Yadu dynasty equal in all respects to Krishna and worship the future descendants of Krishna's family as being equal to Krishna Himself. Thus the continued presence of the Yadu dynasty on the earth would certainly constitute a great impediment on the path of spiritual understanding and a great burden on the earth. To counteract the danger to the world from the offense of equating Vishnu with the family of Vishnu, the Lord decided to crush the Yadu family.

The Supreme Lord, Shri Krishna, is always affectionate to His devotees, but whenever the familial descendants of Lord Krishna become inimical or indifferent to Him, not loving His pure devotees or making friendship with His servants, such so-called family members of the Lord become impediments to His will. There is a tangible danger that ignorant living beings will worship such inimical persons, revering them as close associates of Krishna. For example, to consider Kamsa the maternal uncle of Krishna and therefore a faithful servant of Krishna would be a completely erroneous conclusion. By such a misconception, evil men who oppose the Lord may be accepted as His intimate associates, and persons inimical to Krishna may be thought of as His surrendered dependents appearing in His own family. The purpose of the destruction of the Yadu dynasty was to eradicate the false logic of the Mayavadis who desire to see everything as one in all respects and who therefore improperly reason that the enemies of Krishna's devotees can be His intimate family members.

Texts 11-12

Translation
The sages ViShvamitra, Asita, Kanva, Durvasa, Bhrgu, Angira, KaShyapa, Vamadeva, Atri and Vasishtha, along with Narada and others, once performed fruitive rituals that award abundant pious results, bring great happiness and take away the sins of Kali-yuga for the whole world by merely being recounted. The sages duly executed these rituals in the home of the chief of the Yadus, Vasudeva, the father of Lord Krishna. After Lord Krishna, who was staying in Vasudeva's house as time personified, respectfully sent the sages off at the conclusion of the ceremonies, they went to the holy place called Pindaraka.

Purport
In this verse, Shukadeva Gosvami begins to narrate the story of the brahminical curse that arose against the Yadu dynasty by the Lord's desire. According to Shridhara Svami, certain religious rituals, such as the aShvamedha-yajna, generate pious reactions. On the other hand, activities such as caring for one's children give immediate pleasure in the present only, whereas rituals performed as atonement take away sinful reactions. But the religious activities mentioned in verse 11, which are indicated by the words karmani punya-nivahani su-mangalani gayaj-jagat-kali-malapaharani, were pious in all respects. They produced abundant pious results and great joy and were so potent that merely glorifying these rituals relieves one from all the sinful reactions of Kali-yuga.

The sages called to Vasudeva's house to perform such auspicious religious activities were satisfied with proper gifts and then sent by Krishna to Pindaraka, a nearby holy place situated about two miles from the Arabian Sea on the coast of Gujarat. Its current name is still Pindaraka.

Significantly, Lord Krishna is mentioned here as kalatmana, the form of time, or the Supersoul. In the Eleventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita the Supreme Personality of Godhead reveals Himself to Arjuna as time personified, appearing on the Battlefield of Kurukshetra to destroy all the kings and armies who constitute a burden to the earth. Similarly, kalatmana nivasata yadu-deva-gehe: Krishna was staying in the home of His father Vasudeva as time personified, thus indicating that the time was approaching for the destruction of His own dynasty according to His desire.

Texts 13-15

Translation
To that holy place, the young boys of the Yadu dynasty had brought Samba, son of Jambavati, dressed in woman's garb. Playfully approaching the great sages gathered there, the boys grabbed hold of the sages' feet and impudently asked them with feigned humility, “O learned brahmanas, this black-eyed pregnant woman has something to ask you. She is too embarrassed to inquire for herself. She is just about to give birth and is very desirous of having a son. Since all of you are great sages with infallible vision, please tell us whether her child will be a boy or a girl.”

Purport
Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati has made the following comment: “The impudent behavior of the young Yadus toward the sages headed by Narada, who were all brahmanas and devotees of the Lord, was a display of deviation from the path of Lord Krishna. Similarly, although the prakrta-sahajiyas think of themselves as intimate associates of Krishna, the supremely merciful Lord's determination is perfectly correct in working to finish such false devotees. Such impostors actually never accept real service to Krishna. The yadu-kumaras' deception is termed 'seemingly humble,' meaning that in fact they were anything but humble. Therefore, the ridiculing of Vaishnavas by the Lord's family resulted in a great offense against the devotees of the Lord.”

A similar incident occurred during the pastimes of Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu when His own mother offended Shri Advaita acarya. Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally rectified this offense against a great Vaishnava, and thus the Lord showed His magnanimity. Lord Krishna's pastime of destroying the Yadu dynasty is also a demonstration of His mercy to His devotees.

Believing the brahmanas, Vaishnavas and rshis to be foolishly lacking knowledge in material affairs of sense gratification, the yadu-kumaras dressed Samba, the son of Jambavati, as a woman and tried to mock the saintly assembly. Lord Krishna wanted to teach that such an offense committed against great devotees by His associate Samba would be the cause of the Yadu dynasty's destruction, all as part of His lila.

In modern times such misbehavior has also manifested itself within the Gaudiya Vaishnava community. Unauthorized persons have initiated the process of deceitfully bestowing a woman's dress on their followers. This process is to be counted as a variety of aparadha, or offense against Krishna. Such an attempt to cheapen and ridicule devotional service to Krishna is certainly caused by envy toward the real Vaishnavas, who are faithfully engaged in devotional service according to the rules and regulations of the Vedic literature. Thus Rupa Gosvami has said:

Shruti-smrti-puranadi-
pancaratra-vidhim vina
aikantiki harer bhaktir
utpatayaiva kalpate

“If one wants to demonstrate his great devotion to the Supreme Lord but his process of devotional service violates the standard rules of revealed scriptures such as Shruti, smrti, Puranas and Narada-pancaratra, then his alleged love of Godhead will simply disturb society by misleading people from the auspicious path of spiritual advancement.” (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.101) The taking of a woman's clothing by a man in Krishna-lila was intended to point out this fact. Such an act amounts to cheating and ridicule of the devotees of Krishna. Samba is a personal associate of the Lord, but acting as a harbinger of the future misfortune to be created in Kali-yuga by bogus followers of Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Samba displayed this didactic pastime to help the living entities be blessed on the correct path of devotional service.

The boys said to the sages, “O rshis, O brahmanas, O Narada and other great personalities, can you tell us whether it will be a son or a daughter that will be born from this pregnant woman's womb?” By addressing pure Vaishnavas in this way, they anticipated the fraudulent sampradayas of the modern age in their practice of sakhi-bheka, or dressing men as female associates of the gopis. This unauthorized activity constitutes contempt and mockery of the pure devotees of the Lord.

Many false yogis, imagining they are distributing first-class devotion on the liberated platform, attempt to award the status of “pure devotee” to candidates totally ignorant of the transcendental tastes of madhura-rati, or the Lord's conjugal love in the spiritual world. Even though they know that the general populace is unfit to imitate the liberated associates of the Lord, they artificially decorate ordinary persons with the ornaments of spiritual perfection, such as tears, a melted heart, and the standing on end of the bodily hairs. Thus these bogus yogis introduce a process that misleads the world. Because Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu understood that the great misfortune caused by such false yogis, or kuyogis, was impossible to forestall in the Kali-yuga, He infected them with insane desires for material objects of lust so that ordinary persons can easily identify such false yogis as deviated from the path of pure devotional service.

The mockery of the brahmanas and Vaishnavas by the young boys of the Yadu dynasty who dressed Samba in woman's garb, and the resultant destruction of the Yadu dynasty, conclusively demonstrate the uselessness of the sahajiyasampradayas.

Shrila Jiva Gosvami has confirmed that the lack of humility shown by the sons of the Yadu dynasty was an arrangement by the Lord Himself. In other words, the members of the Yadu dynasty are ultimately associates of Lord Krishna, and to facilitate the instructive pastimes of the Lord they acted in apparently unethical ways.

Text 16

Translation
Thus ridiculed by deceit, the sages became angry, O King, and told the boys, “Fools! She will bear you an iron club that will destroy your entire dynasty.”

Purport
The four defects of the conditioned soul, namely the tendency to commit mistakes (bhrama), illusion (pramada), imperfect senses (karanapatava) and the tendency to cheat (vipralipsa), are not found in pure devotees of the Lord. Lord Krishna, however, arranged for the young members of His own family, the Yadu dynasty, to exhibit the dangerous lower propensities of mankind. Thus the Yadava boys imitated the activities of the followers of a pseudodevotional cult.

Just before His disappearance, Krishna desired that the sages become angry at the young members of the Yadu dynasty, in order to teach that Vaishnavas cannot be thought of as foolish, ignorant or mundane and to reduce the false pride of His own family members. Sometimes misguided persons assume the roles of pseudodevotees and blaspheme the actual process of pure devotional service and the pure devotees who are surrendered to preaching the mission of the Lord. Such foolish pseudodevotees think that their hatred or envy of the actual preaching mission of the Lord constitutes bhakti, but in fact it constitutes the cause of all trouble both for them and for the unfortunate people who follow them. The preachers of pure devotional service expose the pernicious attempts of pseudodevotees, and similarly the sages headed by Narada, who were all exalted devotees of the Lord, addressed the young boys of the Yadu dynasty as bewildered fools and told them, “Within this false womb or false dress of a sadhu, a club will take birth that will be the source of your dynasty's destruction.”

Especially in India, but now also in the Western countries, there is a class of polluted sense enjoyers who also call themselves Gaudiya Vaishnavas and pretend to exhibit the highest state of prema-bhakti. They declare that they are on the highest stage of devotion and therefore concerned only with the most intimate affairs of madhurya-lila, as exhibited in Vrndavana. Sometimes they even dress as gopis, making a false show of entering into the pastimes of Krishna without actually following the standard regulations. In the name of prema-bhakti, they sometimes commit grievous offenses against the pure devotees of Krishna. By this incident concerning the iron club from the so-called womb of Samba, Lord Krishna Himself taught the dangerous results of such pseudodevotion.

Text 17

Translation
Upon hearing the curse of the sages, the terrified boys quickly uncovered the belly of Samba, and indeed they observed that therein was an iron club.

Purport
Upon hearing the words of the Vaishnavas, headed by Narada, the Yadu boys lifted the garment covering Samba's abdomen and saw the fruit of the offense they had committed against Vaishnavas by their deceit: an actual club was there to destroy their dynasty. This example shows that in a polluted society the club of duplicity can never bring the peace found in the society of devotees. Rather, such duplicity smashes all the nondevotional activities and whimsical doctrines of the pseudodevotees. The Yadu boys were wary about jeopardizing their advanced position and indeed had been thinking that as long as they kept their trickery concealed, others would never be able to detect such sophisticated cheating. Nonetheless, they were unable to protect their family from the reaction of their grievous offense against the devotees of the Lord.

Text 18

Translation
The young men of the Yadu dynasty said, “Oh, what have we done? We are so unfortunate! What will our family members say to us?” Speaking thus and being very disturbed, they returned to their homes, taking the club with them.

Text 19

Translation
The Yadu boys, the luster of their faces completely faded, brought the club into the royal assembly, and in the presence of all the Yadavas they told King Ugrasena what had happened.

Purport
ViShvanatha Cakravarti thakura points out that the word rajne refers to King Ugrasena and not to Shri Krishna. Because of their shame and fear, the boys did not approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna.

Text 20

Translation
O King Parikshit, when the inhabitants of Dvaraka heard of the infallible curse of the brahmanas and saw the club, they were astonished and distraught with fear.

Text 21

Translation
After having the club ground to bits, King ahuka [Ugrasena] of the Yadus personally threw the pieces, along with the remaining lump of iron, into the water of the ocean.

Purport
King Ugrasena thought, “Samba and the others should not feel any shame or fear,” and thus without even consulting Shri Krishna he ordered the club ground to bits and thrown into the water, along with a small iron lump that remained, which he considered insignificant.

Text 22

Translation
A certain fish swallowed the iron lump, and the bits of iron, carried back to the shore by the waves, implanted themselves there and grew into tall, sharp canes.

Text 23

Translation
The fish was caught in the ocean along with other fish in a fishermen's net. The iron lump in the fish's stomach was taken by the hunter Jara, who fixed it as an arrowhead at the end of his shaft.

Text 24

Translation
Knowing fully the significance of all these events, the Supreme Lord, though capable of reversing the brahmanas' curse, did not wish to do so. Rather, in His form of time, He gladly sanctioned the events.

Purport
Ordinary persons may be surprised or bewildered that the Lord gladly sanctioned the cursing and destruction of His own dynasty. The word anvamodata used here indicates taking pleasure in something, or giving sanction or approval. It is also mentioned, kala-rupi: Krishna gladly gave His sanction to the brahmanas' curse in the form of time. Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Prabhupada has commented that the Supreme Lord, Krishnacandra, decided to maintain the curse intact in order to protect the actual principles of religion and destroy the unbecoming offense of the deceitful members of the Karshna dynasty. It is clearly explained in Bhagavad-gita that the whole purpose of the Lord's descent into the material world is to reestablish the authentic principles of religion by which the conditioned souls who are suffering intensely under the laws of material nature can regain their original existential status as eternally liberated servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna. The living entity comes to this material world with a desire to lord it over material nature, although the living entity is in fact not a lord but an eternal servant. Due to this perverted tendency to exploit the entire world for his sense gratification, the living entity is also prone to try to pervert the principles of spiritual life so that the eternal religious principles become appropriate to his own material sense gratification. Religion, however, is meant for pleasing the Supreme Lord by obeying His laws. And therefore Lord Krishna Himself personally comes from time to time to revive and enliven the correct method of devotional service to His lotus feet. In the Eleventh Canto of Shrimad-Bhagavatam it is clearly stated that Lord Krishna had completed the vast majority of His pastimes on the earth and was now making the final arrangements for His departure. Therefore, He wished to leave behind a vivid lesson for the living entities of this age that any so-called religious person, even if he is so exalted as to take birth in the Lord's personal family, cannot violate the respect and reverence which is due to the pure devotees of the Lord, such as Narada Muni. The principle of serving the pure devotee of Krishna is so essential for spiritual advancement that the Lord exhibited the inconceivable pastime of causing the destruction of His entire dynasty just to impress this point upon the conditioned souls of Kali-yuga.

Shrimad-Bhagavatam hints at the great misfortunes that would come after the disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such misfortunes also occurred after the disappearance of Lord Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is accepted by Gaudiya Vaishnavas as Krishna Himself. Through various instructions, the Bhagavatam provides for eliminating the cheating pseudoreligion that comes forth in human society after the departure of the Lord.

Lord Caitanya, exhibiting His magnanimous pastimes, drove away from South India all the false doctrines of the apasampradayas, or so-called disciplic traditions of pseudodevotees, who had gained great influence by resorting to the atheistic theories of the Buddhists and Jains. Thus He turned all of India toward the devotional service of Lord Krishna, so that due to the extensive preaching of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His followers there remained no topic of discussion in the world other than devotional service to the Supreme Lord. Tridandipada Prabodhananda Sarasvati has elaborated on this in his verse stri-putradi-katham jahur vishayinah.

Shri Narahari Sarakara thakura, in his book Krishna-bhajanamrta, has corrected the improper statements of the gauranga-nagari-vadis, sakhibheka-vadis, and others of the eleven pseudodisciplic chains that claim to follow Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. These unauthorized persons present cheating in the guise of religion and advertise their duplicity as katha, or pure worship of the Lord. Just as Krishna brought about a furious quarrel to destroy His own family, Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu arranged for the world to be flooded by varieties of Mayavada and karma-vada philosophies just after His disappearance. He did this to destroy persons who belonged to the eleven apasampradayas, or unauthorized disciplic traditions, as well as the many other apasampradayas that would appear in the future and presume to call themselves devotees of Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu or pretend to be descendants in His family line. At the same time, Caitanya Mahaprabhu arranged for His own men to be kept away from the pseudodevotion of these cheaters. The devotees of Lord Gaurasundara, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, can discern the mysteries of His pastimes that manifest in the pastimes of Lord Krishna. The activities of the transcendental body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be understood in any ordinary mundane way. That is the essential meaning of this chapter.

Thus end the purports of the humble servants of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada to the Eleventh Canto, First Chapter, of the Shrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Curse Upon the Yadu Dynasty.”